
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Vision Res. Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 173-193, 1993
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved
0042-6989/93 $5.00 + 0.00
Copyright ©1993 Pergamon Press Ltd
Contour Integration by the Human Visual
System: Evidence for a Local "Association
Field"
DAVID J. FIELD,* ANTHONY HAYES,† ROBERT F. HESSt
Received 2 March 1992; in revised form 9 July 1992
frequency. We suggest that it is possible to take advantage of the redundancy in continuous, but
non-aligned features by associating the outputs of filters with similar tuning. Five experiments were
performed, to determine the rules that govern the perception of continuity. Observers were presented
with arrays of oriented, band-pass elements (Gabor patches) in which a subset of the elements was
aligned along a "jagged" path. Using a forced-choice procedure, observers were found to be capable
of identifying the path within a field of randomly-oriented elements even when the spacing between
the elements was considerably larger than the size of any of the individual elements. Furthermore, when
the elements were oriented at angles up to † 60 deg relative to one another, the path was reliably
identified. Alignment of the elements along the path was found to play a large role in the ability to
detect the path. Small variations in the alignment or aligning the elements orthogonally (i.e.
"side-to-side" as opposed to "end-to-end") significantly reduced the observer's ability to detect the
presence of a path. The results are discussed in terms of an "association field" which integrates
information across neighboring filters tuned to similar orientations. We suggest that some of the
Fractal Orientation Contours Visual coding Psychophysics Texture perception Spatial vision
INTRODUCTION
In the first half of the century, Gestalt psychologists
developed a list of "laws" to account for many of the
known phenomena of perceptual grouping (e.g.
Wertheimer, 1938). Of these, the law of "good continu-
ation" played a central role. The law has been invoked
to account for the perception of continuity under a
variety of conditions including a number of geometric
illusions. Although the phenomena which are described
by this law demonstrate an important organizing prin-
ciple in human vision, the "law of good continuation"
is little more than a description of these phenomena. As
an explanation, the law has provided little predictive
power.
In this study, we take a look at several parameters
involved in the perception of continuity and we relate
these findings to some current notions of early visual
processing. Consider the image presented in Fig. 1. The
*Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853,
U.S.A.
†McGill Vision Research Centre, Department of Ophthalmology,
McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3A IAl.
VR 33/2-B
image shows a tree partially blocked by a regular grid.
The reader should find it easy to identify the continuity
of the branches even though the grid obscures a signifi-
cant portion of each branch. At some level, the visual
system is able to integrate the information from the
different component squares. In this paper, we investi-
gate some of the rules behind this type of integration
process.
Several recent papers have investigated the perception
of continuity by looking at observers' ability to segregate
lines embedded in noise. For example, studies by Uttal
(1975), Smits, Vos and Oeffelen (1985) and Beck, Rosen-
feld and Ivry (1989) have investigated the detection of
straight lines composed of dot elements surrounded by
noise composed of similar dots. When the dots form a
straight line, the row of dots segregates from the back-
ground (i.e. "pops out"). Factors such as the dot spacing
and collinearity were found to play an important role in
this segregation.
While the above studies restricted themselves to the
detection of straight lines, it is clear that segregation of
curved lines is also possible. Studies with Glass patterns
(Glass, 1969), for example, demonstrate the eflectiveness
173

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
174
DAVID J. FIELD et al.
FIGURE I. A demonstration of the phenomenon of "good continuation". The continuity of the branches is easily identified
despite the presence of a disruptive grid.
of local orientation on the global perception
of curva-
perceptual grouping (e.g. Beck et al., 1989; Nothdurft,
ture. Several studies have provided demonstrations that 1991; Uttal, 1975), this study uses stimuli that consist
curved lines composed of oriented segments can "pop
of arrays of oriented line segments. Such stimuli will
out" under appropriate conditions (Gigus & Malik,
allow us to determine how the relative alignment of
1991; Ullman, 1990). Indeed, several authors have
neighbouring elements is related to the perception of
included the representation of curvature in their models
continuity.
of early visual processing (e.g. Watt, 1984; Watt &
However, in addition to being locally oriented, the
Andrews, 1982; Wilson & Richards, 1989; Zucker, 1986;
elements in our experiments are also spatially bandpass
Zucker, Dobbins & Iverson, 1989).
(i.e. Gabor functions). The use of bandpass functions
Recent computational studies have suggested that a
confers two advantages. First, they limit the types of
useful segregation process for real scenes may be based
processes that respond to each element. The spectrum
on local (rather than global) integration (e.g. Gigus &
of a line segment is actually quite complex. The ends of
Malik, 1991; Grossberg & Mignolla, 1985a, b; Morgan
each element have energy at a range of spatial frequen-
& Hotopf, 1989; Parent & Zucker, 1989; Sha'ashua &
cies and orientations. With respect to the early stages of
Ullman, 1988). The general theme of these algorithms is
visual processing, cells selective to a large variety of
that the points along the length of a curved edge can be
orientations and spatial frequencies will respond to such
linked together according to a set of local rules that
a stimulus. By using bandpass elements, we can be more
allow the edge to be seen as a whole, even though
certain about the mechanisms involved in our segre-
different components of the edge are detected by inde-
gation tasks.
pendent mechanisms. Although these algorithms have
The second reason for using bandpass stimuli is that
been found to be useful for segregating structure from
they allow us to explore how the grouping processes
noisy backgrounds, there is little psychophysical or
function at a single spatial scale. We believe that with
physiological evidence to support the notion that such
many natural edges it may be useful to solve the
algorithms are actually employed by the human visual
continuity problem separately at each scale. As an
example, consider the two edges shown in Fig. 2. Figure
In this paper, we investigate several rules that the
2(a) shows a smooth edge filtered into three spatial
visual system uses to integrate the output of early stages
frequency bands while Fig. 2(b) shows a fractal edge
of visual processing. In line with previous studies in filtered in the same way.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
CONTOUR INTEGRATION BY THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM
175
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2. Smooth and jagged edges displayed at three spatial scales. (a) Presents a smooth edge (or alternatively a fractal
edge with a low fractal dimension) and (b) presents a jagged edge (or alternatively a fractal edge-actually part of the
Mandelbrot set—with a high fractal dimension). In the right panel of each figure the three tiers show, from top to bottom,
the results of filtering each edge with bandpass filters of high, medium and low peak spatial frequencies. Notice that in (a)
the position of the edge is aligned across the three scales. This is not the case for (b).
Smooth edges will show considerable agreement position and orientation of the edge changes from scale
across neighboring frequency bands. Indeed, edge detec- to scale. At any particular position, the edge may show
tion proposals like those of Marr and Hildreth (1980), a particular orientation in only one spatial-frequency
Canny (1986) and Lowe (1988) take advantage of this
band. Indeed, it has been suggested that the bandpass
agreement to identify which image structures represent
properties of the mammalian visual system provide an
meaningful edges. However, fractal edges do not show
ideal mechanism for extracting this locally bandpass
the same consistency across spatial scales. Although the
structure in natural scenes (Field, 1987, 1992; Hayes,
edge is roughly continuous at each scale, the precise
1989). Thus, the mammalian visual system may solve the

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
176
DAVID J. FIELD et al.
continuity problem at each scale separately, and the use
of bandpass elements provides a technique for exploring a period of 6 weeks.
how the visual system integrates this information.
Nontine adh or t uocepcrimens ere imrtacedad run over
An example of the type of stimulus used in our Stimuli
experiments is shown in Fig. 3. The image consists of an
The stimuli presented to the observers, illustrated in
array of randomly oriented bandpass elements in which
Figs 3, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14 can be described with three sets
a portion of the elements are aligned along a curved
of parameters. They are: (a) the parameters describing
path. Although the path is easily identified, there exists
the individual elements in the stimulus; (b) the position-
no single dimension or parameter that allows the path to
ing of these elements along the feature path; and (c) the
be extracted from the background. While it may be
parameters describing the relative positions of the back-
possible to explain many texture segregation tasks with
ground elements.
reference to a parallel filtering process (e.g. Bergen, 1991;
(a) The elements. All elements, whether part of the
Bovik, Clark & Geisler, 1990; Graham, Beck & Sutter, path or part of the background elements, are described
1992; Landy & Bergen, 1991), that approach will not
by the products of a circular Gaussian and an oriented
work here. For example, if one looks at the response of
sinusoid (a circular Gabor function). The equation is
an array of vertically oriented mechanisms to the
thus:
stimulus (e.g. convolve the image with an oriented
filter), one finds that only a portion of the path will be
G(X,J) =e-(83+y3)202
extracted along with a large number of elements from
*cOS[2T *(cos f*x + sin 9*y)/p +Ф] (1)
the background (see Fig. 4). For these types of stimuli,
where 0 controls the orientation and $ determines the
there exists no single parameter (orientation, spatial
relative phase of the elements.
frequency) which distinguishes the path from the back-
The size of the elements as defined by o was fixed at
ground. The perception of continuity must be derived
4.0 pixels (o = 4.0). This results in an element with a full
from a process which integrates along the length of
width at half-height (20) of approx. 8.0 pixels. The
the path. The experiments described in the next
period of the modulating sinusoid was set to 8.0 pixels
section explore some of the processes which underlie
(p = 8.0). In all experiments, the observers viewed the
this integration.
screen from a distance of 90cm. These parameters
resulted in elements with a peak spatial frequency of
METHOD
Viewing conditions and experimental design
All experiments used a temporal two-alternative
forced-choice (2AFC) design. In each experiment, a trial
consisted of successively presenting two images: an
image containing (1) both background elements and the
path elements; and (2) an image containing only back-
ground elements. Each image was presented sequentially
for 1.0 sec (except in Expt I where a condition was run
0.25 sec stimulus duration and 1.0 sec between the two
intervals). The screen was set to the mean gray level
between trials. Observers were asked to determine which
interval contained the path using the buttons on the
computer's mouse.
Observers viewed the images from a distance of 90 cm
under conditions of low ambient illumination. At this
distance, each image (the array of elements) subtended
8.0 deg of visual angle. The mean luminance of the
screen was fixed at 35 cd/m'. All images consisted of
512 × 512 pixel images displayed on an RGB monitor
driven by a SUN Sparc 2 computer. A look-up tabie was
used to linearize the luminance levels resulting in a
look-up table of approx. 7.5 bits (182 gray levels).
Images for all conditions were created before each run
and stored on the computer's hard disk (a total of over
800 megabytes of images). Each block of trials consisted
of five conditions (e.g. five different inter-element path
angles) with 50 trials in each condition. Thus the total
number of presentations in any given block consisted of
250 trials. Each block was run four times resulting in a
total of 200 trials in each condition. The blocks from
8.0 c/deg and a bandwidth of approx. 1.2 octaves
(o =T6deg). The contrast of each of the elements was the
maximum allowed by the screen under these viewing
conditions (95%). Since the elements did not have
significant overlap, the contrast of the entire 512 x 512
image was the same as that of the individual elements.
(b) The stimulus path. The path on which the elements
were placed was created using the rules outlined below
and is illustrated in Fig. 5. These rules were followed to
ensure that no information regarding the existence of the
path was available to the observers other than the
relative orientation of the elements defining the path.
For example, if the spacing of the elements in the path
was not equated with the spacing of the background
elements, then it would be possible to identify the path
simply on the basis of the relative density of elements
around the path.
Each stimulus was constructed by following method.
The terms refer to the schematic diagram shown in
Fig. 5.
1. The image was divided into a grid proportional
to the desired spacing.
2. A starting point for the path was selected (P1).
The starting point of the path was always at a
point 1.0 deg (64 pixels) from the center of the
image.
3. A vector of distance D was projected from Pl to
P2 directed towards the center of the image plus
or minus a variable angle (Iß). For most of the
studies described in this paper, the distance
between elements was set to 0.5 deg (32 pixels).

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
FIGURE 3. An example of a stimulus used in the experiments reported. The left-hand panel shows the path of elements (the stimulus) tha
in an array of randomly oriented clements (the stimulus plus background shown on the right). In all experiments, the stimulus consisted ol
example each successive element differs in orientation by ‡30 deg and for this difference in orientation the string of alignes

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
178
DAVID J. FIELD et al.
FIGURE 4. An array of elements, containing a path, after filtering with a vertically oriented bandpass filter. The path cannot
be segregated from the "noise" background by filtering along a single dimension, such as orientation. See text for details.
P3
PLC
P2
‹D+AD—
<D—
FIGURE 5. Grid showing the placement of path elements. Each stimulus was divided into a grid of 16 x 16 squares each of
which contained an element. Each stimulus consisted of a total of 256 elements, 12 path element and 244 background elements.
Background elements were not constrained in orientation, but were constrained in position to fall within a square. Path elements
were constrained to fall within a square along a pre-determined path; shown as a bold line. The length D is the length of segment
on which each element was placed (AD is a small corrective jitter of 10.25*D). The angle B is the difference in angle of
orientation of each successive path segment (Aß is a small random jitter between -5 and + 5 deg). The angle a is the angle
of orientation of the sinusoid with respect to the path. See text for details.

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
CONTOUR INTEGRATION BY THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM
179
However, in Exp. IV, we look at the effect of
distance by using separations of 0.25 and
0.9 deg.
4. An element was placed at the halfway point
between P1 and P2 providing that the square
was not already occupied by an element. If the
path already contained element, then the path
was extended (D/4) to a square that did not
contain an element. In most of the experiments,
the orientation of the element was set to the
orientation of the path (a = 0). However, in
Exp. II the element orientation was orthogonal
to the path orientation (a = 90 deg).
5. At position P2, after a rotation by angle ß or
- B, another vector was projected a distance D
to P3. In all conditions, the path rotation was
one of two angles (tß). For example, in the
60 deg condition, the angle at point p was either
+60 or -60; there was no possibility of a
straight continuation of the path. In addition to
this fixed rotation, a small random variation
around ß was also added (uniform distribution
with a mean of 0.0 deg and a maximum of
+ 10 deg). This small addition helped to pre-
vent any geometrical patterns forming in the
path.
6. Steps 4 and 5 were repeated until the path was
completed.
For all the experiments described in this paper, the
path was composed of 12 elements.
(c) Placing of background elements. After the path
elements had been determined, the background elements
were added to the image. An element was added to each
square of the grid unless the square already contained an
element. The orientation of the element (0) was selected
at random and its position within each square was
randomly (uniformly) distributed. With 512 x 512 im-
ages and the square size set to 32 x 32, this resulted in
a total of 256 elements in each image. Thus each trial
consisted of a stimulus containing the path (12 path
elements + 244 background elements) and a stimulus
containing only background elements (256 background
elements).
Figures 3 and 6 show examples of path orientations of
30 and 60 deg. As noted in the previous section, the
relative orientation of successive elements differed by a
constant angular difference (+B rather than a range of
angles between +ß and -ß). Thus, there were no
occurrences of two successive elements along the
path having the same absolute orientation. In this first
study, the five conditions were presented at stimulus
durations of both 1.0 and 0.25 sec. The 0.25 sec con-
dition was included in this experiment to determine the
role that the stimulus duration played in the segregation
process.
Results
The results of the first experiment are shown in Fig. 7.
Proportion correct is plotted as a function of path
orientation (ß). Solid symbols show the results for the
1.0 sec. duration and open symbols show the results for
the 0.25 sec duration. Error bars provide the standard
error of the mean of the four runs of fifty trials. The
results show that with larger angles of relative element
orientation, the task becomes increasingly difficult. With
the 1.0 sec duration, the observers are still above chance
out to 60 deg. The results suggest that under these
experimental conditions, the path can be identified when
the successive elements in the path differ by 60 deg or
less. With the 0.25 sec duration, the subjects found the
path more difficult to detect. Since the size of the
stimulus was 8.0 deg and the beginning of the path was
set at 1.0 deg from the center, the path was not guaran-
teed to fall in the fovea. With two or three fixations as
allowed with the 1.0 sec duration, it was possible to
identify the path under conditions where the path could
not be identified in the 0.25 condition stimulus. Nonethe-
less, even with the 0.25 sec duration, the subjects could
reliably detect the path even when the successive el-
ements differed by I45 deg.
From these results, it is not possible to determine
whether the ability to detect the path is a function of the
alignment of these elements along the axis of the path or
a function of the difference in orientation between
successive elements in the path. Experiment II was
designed to dissociate these two possibilities.
Observers
Two of the authors served as observers in all exper-
iments. Both are corrected myopes. Both observers were
given sufficient practice (typically 100 trials) to reach an
asymptote in their performance for each experiment.
EXPERIMENT II—ELEMENTS ORTHOGONAL
TO THE PATH
In Expt I, the elements were placed end-to-end as
shown in Figs 3 and 6. Consider the hypothesis that the
ability to integrate these features is functionally related
to the process involved in detecting a continuous but
jagged edge. Under such an assumption, one might
EXPERIMENT I—RELATIVE ORIENTATION
expect that the ability to detect the path with the
OF PATH ELEMENTS
end-to-end alignment would be significantly better
The first experiment investigates the relation between
than ability to detect the path when the elements are
the relative orientation of successive elements along the
aligned side-to-side with respect to the orientation of
path and the observer's ability to detect the path.
the path.
Observers were presented images containing paths in
A second hypothesis is that the process involved in
which the orientation of successive elements differed by integrating the path is simply related to the overall
+B, where B was equal to 15, 30, 45, 60 or 75 deg. difference in orientation between successive elements in

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
the task of detecting the path considerably more difficult in this condition than in the condition shown in Fig. 3

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
PROPORTION CORRECT
1.0%=
0.9-
0.8-
0.7-
0.6-
0.5-
CONTOUR INTEGRATION BY THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM
1.01m
AH
PROPORTION CORRECT
0.9-
0.8-
0.7-
0.6-
CHANCE
0.5
181
DJF
CHANCE
T
40
60
60
80
ANGLE (deg)
ANGLE (deg)
FIGURE 7. Results of Expt I. Path detection performance (two-alternative forced-choice) measured as a function of change
in path orientation (IB) for subjects AH and DJF. Each datum is the average of four sets of triats; each trial consisted of
so pesent or da Ththe sidaghed to sach datum at tor she thec il iutis duatesa wie died ern ured tor Expt V V.
The open symbols and dashed lines show the results for a control condition with a stimulus duration of 0.25 sec.
the path. Under this second hypothesis, one would not when the elements making up the line were placed
expect to see a difference between the end-to-end vs the side-to-side as opposed to end-to-end.
side-to-side alignment. In this experiment, we repeated
Our results demonstrate that the alignment plays a
the conditions of Expt I, with one important exception. significant role at all orientations and suggest that the
The elements along the path were rotated by 90 deg,
process that mediates the integration of elements shows
resulting in a path where the elements were aligned
a strong bias towards the end-to-end alignment.
side-to-side. Since these elements were created using a
circular Gaussian [equation (1)], the rotation did not
increase or decrease the distance between successive
EXPERIMENT III—SELECTIVITY ALONG
elements along the path. Furthermore, since the elements
THE PATH
were separated by a distance that corresponds to eight
times the standard deviation (32 pixels) of the Gaussian
The results of Expt I suggest that it is possible to
envelope, there was still no significant overlap between
detect a path even when the elements differ in orientation
the elements.
by as much as 60 deg. This might appear to pose a
An example of a stimulus used in this experiment is
dilemma. If this integration process can accommodate
shown in Fig. 8. The difference in orientation between
an angular difference of 60 deg, what makes the path
successive elements is the same as that of Fig. 3 (i.e.
unique among all the potential paths that are found in
end-to-end alignment). The reader
can verify for
the randomly oriented background elements? Since the
him/herself that the path is considerably more difficult to
average angular difference between any two random
detect in Fig. 8 than in Fig. 3.
elements is 90 deg, it would appear that there must be
a large variety of potential paths available in the
background elements.
Results
However, in the experiments described above there is
The results of Expt II are shown in Fig. 9. The data
a unique link between the relative positions of the
for both observers are plotted together with the results
elements and their relative orientations. As shown in
of Expt I (dotted lines). One can see that under these
Fig. 5, the orientation of the elements is locked to the
conditions, the ability to detect the path is significantly
orientation of the path; a smooth curve passing through
reduced when the relative orientation between successive
the long axis can be drawn between any two successive
elements differs by more than 30 deg. The results support
elements. Does the ability to integrate the elements of the
the notion that the integration between elements is path depend on this joint constraint of position and
related to the continuity of edges or lines rather than a orientation?
more general segregation process based on the redun-
To test this hypothesis, we conducted an experiment
dancy of the stimulus or due to a general linking of in which the orientation of the elements was varied
features with similar orientation. Our results are in
relative to the orientation of the path. The path was
agreement with study of Beck et al. (1989) who measured
constructed in the same way as Expt I. However, the
the reaction time to detect a set of vertically oriented
orientation of each element along the path was then
elements aligned in a straight line and embedded in a
given a random change of Ia where a was either I15
background of non-aligned vertical elements. Observers
or ‡30 deg. An example of the stimuli used in Expt III
were found to be significantly slower at detecting the line is shown in Fig. 10.
VR 33/2C

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
FIGURE 8. An example of a stimulus used in Expt II. In this example the path orientation variable ß has the values ‡30 deg, and the or
is 90 deg with respect to the path. The path has the same parameters as the path depicted in Fig. 3, except the alignment of the Gabor patches

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
PROPORTION CORRECT
1.0-
0.9-
0.8 •
0.7
0.6
0.5 •
CONTOUR INTEGRATION BY THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM
AH
PROPORTION CORRECT
CHANCE
1.0-
0.9
0.8-
0.7-
0.6-
0.5-
183
DJF
CHANCE
20
40
60
80
20
40
60
80
ANGLE (deg)
ANGLE (deg)
FIGURE 9. Results of Expt II. Details as for Fig. 7 (1.0 sec condition) except that the elements are aligned orthogonal to
the path. The dotted line is the weighted error function fit to the results of Expt I, and is used as a basis for comparison for
the results of Expts II, III, IV and V.
Results
Figure 12 shows the 0.25 deg condition relative to the
The results of this experiment are presented in
0.S deg condition.
Fig. 1l. Results are shown for both observers using
both the a = † 15 and I30 deg (solid lines) along
Results
with the results from Expt I where a = 0 deg (dotted
Figure 13 plots the results for each observer as a
lines). It is clear that this type of manipulation results
function of the segment length. Although the observers'
in a substantial reduction in the ability to detect the
performance decreases with distance, it is clear that they
path.
are capable of performing this task over a wide range of
The results support the notion that there is a con-
straint between the relative positions and the orien-
distances. At the largest inter-element distance (0.9 deg),
the path segment is over 16 times the o of the element
tations of the elements. The results suggest that the
(8 times the full-width at half-height). These results
visual system can integrate large differences in orien-
imply an interaction over relatively large areas of the
tation only when those differences lie along a smooth
visual field. Indeed, they provide further support for the
path. Consider for example, the 15 deg randomization
notion that these effects are due to some form of
with the 0 deg path angle (a = 15 and ß = 0). The 15 deg
interaction between mechanisms rather than to any
randomization makes this task difficult, even though the
single mechanism responding to successive portions of
observers have no difficulty tracking a 15 deg orientation
the path.
difference when there is no variation (a = 0 and ß = 15).
It should be noted that in this experiment, we have
We will return to this point in the Discussion.
confounded the size of the display with the distance
between the elements. Thus, the drop in performance at
the large distances may be partly due to the fact that
EXPERIMENT IV-INTER-ELEMENT DISTANCE
many of the elements of the display are now presented
in the periphery. It is difficult to avoid this confound
In this experiment we investigate the effects of the without confounding other factors. If the display size
spacing of the elements. If the process that mediates the remained constant, then the number of elements would
detection of the path is a local process, one would expect have to change under the different conditions. The
some reduction in the ability to detect the path when the results we obtained allow us to conclude that the inte-
elements were spaced relatively far apart. In the two
gration is possible at large distances. However, further
previous experiments, the distance between the elements
experiments would be required to determine whether the
averaged 0.5 deg (the stimulus array measured
results were due solely to the distance between the
8.0 x 8.0 deg across). In this experiment (IV), the seg- elements.
ment length was set to either 0.25 or 0.9 deg (the largest
distance possible with our equipment). The total number
of elements in the stimulus remained constant (256) as
EXPERIMENT V—RELATIVE PHASE OF
well as the total number of elements in the path (12).
PATH ELEMENTS
Viewing distance and element size remained unchanged.
In the first four experiments, all the elements were of
Thus, the change in spacing resulted in stimuli of the same form: even-symmetric Gabor functions. The
different sizes. In particular, element spacing of 0.25 deg last experiment was run to determine whether the el-
resulted in a stimulus of 4.0 x 4.0 deg while a spacing ements were required to have the same form to achieve
of 0.9 deg resulted in a stimulus of 14.4 x 14.4 deg. path integration. The conditions of this experiment were

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
FIGURE 10. An example of a stimulus used in Expt III. In this example the path orientation variable B has the values +15 deg, and th
(o) is ‡ 30 deg with respect to the path.

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
PROPORTION CORRECT
1.0-
0.9-
0.8
0.7-
0.6
0.5-
CONTOUR INTEGRATION BY THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM
AH
15°
30°
PROPORTION CORRECT
" CHANCE
1.01
0.9-
0.8-
0.7 -
0.6-
0.5-
185
DJF
0°
15°
30°
CHANCE
20
40
60
80
20
40
60
80
ANGLE (deg)
ANGLE (deg)
FIGURE 11. Results of Expt III. The solid symbols plot the results for orientations of the element with respect to the path
(a) of #15 deg, and the open symbols for orientations of ‡30 deg. The dashed line shows the results from Expt I (x =0).
the same as that of Expt I, except the relative phase of
Experiments I and IV demonstrate that observers are
the elements [ø in equation (1)] was randomized (uni- able to segregate the path from the background when the
formly distributed between 0 and 2). The random-
elements in the path differ up to 60 deg in orientation
ization applied to all the path elements and the
and when they are separated by distances up to 7 times
background elements. An example of one of the stimuli
their width. Experiment II demonstrates that the ability
to detect the path is significantly worse when the el-
ements are placed side-to-side as opposed to end-to-end,
confirming the finding of Beck et al. (1989). If this
The results of Expt V are plotted in Fig. 15 (solid lines)
along with the results from Expt I. These results show
no significant difference between this condition and the
condition of Expt I. The results suggest that the relative
phases of the components are not important to the
joining of the segments. With the randomization pro-
cedure applied to the phase, the greatest possible differ-
ence in phase between two successive elements will be
r (+T = -n) while the average difference will be In/2.
It is not possible to conclude that phase is irrelevant
under all possible conditions. For example, it may be
that phase will play a significant role when the band-
widths of the elements are broader than those used in
this study. However, these results imply that under the
conditions of this experiment, the observers can segre-
gate the path even when the relative phases of the path
elements is random.
segregation is due to the association in responses, then
the results suggest that the association between elements
is stronger along the axis of the element than orthogonal
to the axis.
Figure 16(a) provides one way to represent this
proposed linking between the responses to each ele-
ment. For a given element in our displays, there appears
to be a region around the element where other elements
group together and segregate from the background. We
describe this region of association as an "association
field".
It would be difficult to provide the precise parameters
describing the size of this field. The exact size will be
dependent on the particular experimental conditions
employed. For example, our results are based on stimuli
which have 12 elements in the path and 256 total
elements in the stimulus. Significant changes to these
parameters are likely to change the proportion correct
and would therefore change our estimates of the overall
DISCUSSION
The five experiments reported above provide us with
a number of insights into the processes that mediate the
segregation of a path of elements from its background.
In each of these experiments, the elements in the path
cannot be identified on the basis of the stimulus proper-
ties of the elements. These properties (e.g. spatial
frequency, orientation, intensity, contrast, etc.) were the
same for the elements in both the path and the back-
ground. The path is identified by the relative alignment
of its constituent elements. We interpret these results as
suggesting a localized linking process or association
between the responses to the elements in the path
according to a specific set of rules.
size of this association field. However, such changes
should not affect the elongated shape of this field
However these results are interpreted, it is clear that this
"association field" covers a considerably wider area than
would be covered by the receptive field of a mammalian
cortical cell.
The results of Expt III suggest that this association
field should not be thought of as a general spread of
activation, linking together all types of features within
the field. The results show that variations in the orien-
tation of the elements relative to the orientation of the
path, result in a significant drop in performance. This
suggests that the different parts of the association field
show considerable orientation selectivity. Figure 16

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
FIGURE 12. An example of a stimulus used in Expt IV. The effects of the element spacing was studied by maintaining the total number of e
the elements. The right hand panel shows the stimulus when the spacing was set to 0.25 deg (as opposed to the 0.5 deg spacing shown on the left
variable B has the values +15 deg, and the orientation of the clement is aligned with the path (x =

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
1.0
0.9-
0.8-
0.7-
0.6-
0.5-
CONTOUR INTEGRATION BY THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM
AH
0.25°
0.5°
p.9°
CHANCE
PROPORTION CORRECT
1.04
0.9-
0.8-
0.7-
0.6-
0.5-
187
DJF
0.25°
20.5°
0.9°
CHANCE
40
80
20
40
60
80
ANGLE (deg)
ANGLE (deg)
FIGURE 13. Results of Expt IV. The square symbols plot the results for average distances of 0.25 deg between element
"boxes", the triangular symbols for 0.9 deg. The average distance between element boxes in Expt I--the dashed line-was
0.5 deg. The space constant of the elements [ø in equation (I)) was íodeg for all conditions.
shows our proposal of the preferred orientation in these parallels but emphasize the speculative nature of
different regions of the field. The rays extending from the this discussion.
ends of the element represent the optimal orientation at
First, a comment about the single detector notion. We
different positions relative to the position of the element.
believe that the results of our study do not support the
As portrayed in Fig. 16(b), elements are associated
notion that the detection of the path is mediated by a cell
according
to joint constraints of position and
with a receptive field that conforms to the layout of the
orientation.
path. This type of explanation may be conceivable for
The results of Expt V suggest that the linking process
the case where the elements along the path differ by
may be orientation selective but phase invariant. If this
0 deg. However, the explanation would have difficulty
holds up under closer scrutiny, this would imply that a
when the elements differed by more 15 deg. Since there
mechanism more analogous to a complex cell would be
are 12 elements in each path and the orientation differ-
appropriate as the basis of linking. It must be empha-
ence is always I0, the number of potential paths from
sized, however, that this description in terms of an
each starting point in each condition is 2'2 or 4098. The
orientation-selective association field is not a necessary
notion that there might exist 4098 "path detectors" at
model of early visual processing. Although we discuss
each location conforming to the range of possible paths
some interesting parallels in the next section, the associ-
seems quite unlikely. Furthermore, it is even unlikely
ation field may represent a grouping strategy at relatively
that successive elements along the path are detected by
high stages of visual processing. We expect to find
the same mechanism. The bandpass nature of the el-
correspondence at some level of the visual system, but
ements as well as the relative orientation and distance
the description above does not suggest where that
between successive elements should preclude a cell with
correspondence lies.
a classically defined receptive field from responding to
The five experiments reported in this paper are not
meant to represent an exhaustive list of the parameters
If our results are assumed to be a consequence of local
important in definining the association field. Parameters
interactions between cortical cells, then one must accept
such as the spatial frequency bandwidth, orientation
that the interactions are occurring at relatively large
bandwidth, size, color and relative depth may all have
distances: larger than that represented by a single orien-
significant effects on the ability to segregate the path
tation column. Experiment IV shows interactions at a
from the background. For example, the oriented el-
distance of 0.9 deg for stimuli with a width of 0.125 deg.
ements making up the path may only group together
Near the fovea of the monkey, an orientation column
when they share similar properties (i.e. color, depth).
cycles with a periodicity of approx. 1 mm (a hyper-
However, such experiments are beyond the scope of this
column) which corresponds in the fovea to a distance of
paper.
approx. 0.3 deg (Hubel & Weisel, 1974a, b). To account
for our results on the basis of interactions between cells
Physiological speculations
in primary visual cortex, interactions between cells in
As with most psychophysical studies, it would not
neighboring columns—not just neighboring cells would
be wise to make strong conclusions about the physio-
be required.
logical mechanisms which underlie our results.
It is known that there exist lateral (inter-columnar)
However, there are some interesting parallels between
connections in primary visual cortex (Rockland & Lund,
our results and several known properties of the
1983; McGuire, Gilbert, Rivlen & Weisel, 1991) and
mammalian visual system. In this section, we discuss there is both anatomical and physiological evidence that

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
FIGURE 14. An example of a stimulus used in Expt V. In this experiment the phase of the elements [o in cquation (I)) was randomly st
were the same as in Expt I.

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
PROPORTION CORRECT
1.0-
0.9-
0.8-
0.7-
0.6-
0.5
CONTOUR INTEGRATION BY THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM
AH
PROPORTION CORRECT
CHANCE
1.04
0.9-
0.8-
0.7-
0.6-
0.5-
189
DUF
CHANCE
20
40
60
80
20
ANGLE (deg)
40
60
ANGLE (deg)
FIGURE 15. Results of Expt V. The data are plotted along with the results of Expt I (dashed line).
80
cells having similar orientation preference are intercon- Richards, 1989). Kellman and Shipley (1991) have also
nected (Ts'o & Gilbert, 1988; Gilbert & Weisel, 1989).
proposed a set of rules similar to the association field
However, the results of Expts I, Il and III suggest that
to account for the perceptual completion of occluded
the process that underlies this segregation shows a
edges in complex objects and images with illusory
specific relation between position and orientation. Simi-
contours.
lar orientations are grouped together only when the
Parent and Zucker (1989) as well as Sha'ashua and
alignment falls along particular axes. At the present time
Ullman (1988) have proposed algorithms for extracting
there is no evidence that these lateral cortical
curves which link orientation-selective elements. Our
connections follow these constraints.
results provide support for the notion that the human
Recently, several studies have found evidence for
visual system utilizes a local grouping process similar to
another long-range orientation specific interaction in the
the algorithms suggested by these authors. However, one
visual cortex (e.g. Gray & Singer, 1989; Engel, Konig &
of the difficulties with their algorithms as a model for
Singer, 1991). These studies suggest that there exist
human vision is that curves are extracted using a time
coherent oscillations in the activity of neighboring neur-
consuming iterative process based on a relaxation
ons in the visual cortex. The timing between successive
method. As Gigus and Malik (1991) have recently noted,
action potentials of many cortical cells do not occur at
such iterative algorithms are not biologically plausible,
random following the presentation of a stimulus (e.g.
requiring multiple feedback loops to extract a curve.
moving a bar across the receptive field). For many cells,
Gigus and Malik have shown that it is possible to
the probability of response varies cyclically at a fre-
implement a completely parallel feed-forward algorithm
quency of around 50 Hz. The oscillations have been
for curvature extraction, which shows properties similar
found to be coherent (phase-linked) between cells in
to our proposed association field and is both biologically
neighboring orientation columns (non-overlapping re-
plausible and computationally efficient.
ceptive fields) when the orientation tuning of the two
A second feature of these computational algorithms is
cells was similar (Gray & Singer, 1989). Eckhorn, Baur,
that they are principally designed for smooth curves that
Jordan, Brosch, Kruse, Munk and Reitboeck (1988) and
have well defined tangents. For smooth curves, as shown
Engel et al. (1991) have suggested that these oscillations
in Fig. 2(a), the tangent of the edge is relatively constant
represent a method of linking features in the visual
at different scales. This redundancy across scale can help
cortex. Further work would be required to determine
to define the curve. Although smooth curves are com-
whether such oscillations play a significant role in the
mon in a structured (man-made) environment, it should
segregation process described in this paper. However, if
not be assumed that the mammalian visual system is
the coherence in the oscillations was found to conform
specially adapted to handle such curves.
to the properties of this psychophysically defined
Fractal curves like the one shown in Fig. 2(b) do not
association field, a stronger case could be made.
have a well defined tangent. Rather, the orientation of
the edge will depend on the particular scale under
Computational models of curve extraction
consideration. As one moves from one spatial frequency
The model that we propose in this paper shows some
band to the next, the orientation of the filtered edge will
similarities to the models proposed in the computational
smoothly change. Indeed, the edge may be continuous at
literature on curve extraction. A number of studies have
each scale even though the local orientation of the edge
suggested an important role for the representation of
changes from scale to scale.
curvature at quite early stages of the visual system (e.g.
Fractals provide a useful means of creating and
Attneave, 1954; Blakemore & Over, 1974; Koenderink &
representing visual features that have structure at a
Richards, 1988; Watt & Andrews, 1982; Wilson & variety of spatial scales (e.g. Mandelbrot, 1982). In

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
190
DAVID J. FIELD et al.
particular, fractal models have been found to provide an
effective description of many natural image phenomena
(e.g. Keller, Crownover & Chen, 1987; Pentland, 1984)
and fractais are increasingly used in the study of visual
processing (e.g. Cutting & Garvin, 1987; Knill, Field &
Kersten, 1989; Westheimer, 1991).
In this study, we have data from only a single fre-
quency band. To determine how the human visual system
integrates information across neighboring frequency
bands would require further experiments, which we leave
for a later paper. However, we should point out that the
proposed association field may have a number of par-
ameters other than those of orientation and
position.
Relation to texture segregation
A number of studies have been concerned with the prin-
ciples by which textures group together and segregate
from other textures. The Gestalt rules of organization
FIGURE 16. The association field. The diagram at the top of the figure (a) represents the rules by which the elements in the
path are associated and segregated from the background. The precise size of this field would be difficult to determine from
this study since it will certainly vary with the particular experimental conditions employed. For example, in this study, the
subjects were required to detect 12 elements in a grid of 256 elements. Changing either the path size or the grid size would
change our estimate of the association field. The curves in (b) represent the specific rules of alignment. Grouping occurs only
when the orientation of elements conforms to first-order curves (i.e. curves with no points of inflection) like those shown by
the rays extending from the center of the elements as shown in this figure. The integration process thus appears to show strong
joint constraints of position and orientation. Thus, our results suggest that elements with alignment like that shown on the
bottom left will be "associated" while elements like that shown on the right will not even though the difference in orientation
is the same in both examples.

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
CONTOUR INTEGRATION BY THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM
191
FIGURE 17. This texture contains elements in which the immediate neighbors on all sides differ in orientation by 15 deg. If
a perceptual texture was defined only by the feature contrast at the border, then one would not expect to see any grouping
in this image. However, the reader will probably notice that the elements that are aligned group together producing a percept
of elements flowing smoothly down the image.
(Wertheimer, 1938), as well as studies by Beck (e.g. 1966,
processes which group features locally. We believe that
1983) and Julesz (see Julesz & Shumer, 1981 for review),
the recent demonstrations of Nothdurft (1985, 1991)
have shown that one structure will segregate from
suggest that a similar local process may be involved in
another when the textures differ by an appropriate set of
many texture segregation tasks. Nothdurft demonstrates
parameters. The identification and classification of these
that when the orientation of small line elements shift
parameters has been the subject of many recent psycho-
slowly across an image, these elements group together
physical studies (e.g. Bovik et al., 1990; Graham et al.,
and segregate from the background. His results demon-
1992; Sutter, Beck & Graham, 1989; see Bergen, 1991 for
strate that the global feature-based model is insufficient.
review). Much of this work has focused on the global
However, Nothdurft proposes that the segregation of
nature of the segregation. In these studies, the segre-
textures is dependent on the "feature contrast" at
gation process is presumed to result from a process
the borders of the texture not the local grouping of
involving spatially-parallel filters which are selective
structures within the texture. Landy and Bergen (1991)
along a number of dimensions. Textures that differ in
make a similar argument using textures which do not
orientation or spatial frequency content, for example,
consist of localized elements. Their textures were created
are readily segregated.
by selectively filtering different regions of a noise pattern.
In our stimuli, there does not exist any "global"
They found that the continuity at the border between
feature that allows the path to be segregated from the
two textures was important in the ability to segregate the
background. It is not possible to segregate the path by
textures.
filtering along any particular dimension. Our results
Consider the image show in Fig. 17. In this image, all
imply that the path segregation is based on local elements differ in orientation from their four neighbors

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
192
DAVID J. FIELD et al.
by a constant amount. There are no locations where the
difference in orientation is larger or smaller than any-
where else. Thus, by Nothdurft's definition there exist no
regions where there exists "feature contrast". Nonethe-
less, the image does not appear as a uniform texture. The
reader will probably see a general "flow" of elements
providing the impression of a wave of elements that
change direction moving down the image. This demon-
stration implies that some aspects of texture segregation
may be more dependent on local rather than global
grouping rules. Whether local processes can account for
all segregation tasks remains to be seen.
Gigus, Z. & Malik, J. (1991). Detecting curvilinear structure in images.
U.C. Berkeley CSD Technical Report 91/619.
Gilbert, C. D. & Weisel, T. N. (1989). Columnar specificity of intrinsic
horizontal and cortico-cortical connections in cat visual cortex.
Journal of Neuroscience, 9, 2432-2442.
Glass, L. (1969). Moiré effect from random dots. Nature, 243, 578-580.
Graham, N., Beck, J. & Sutter, A. (1992). Nonlinear processes in
spatial frequency channel models of perceived texture segregation:
Effects of sign and amount of contrast. Vision Research, 32,
Gray, C. M. & Singer, W. (1989). Stimulus-specific neuronal oscil-
lations in orientation columns of cat visual cortex. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 86, 1698-1702
Grossberg, S. & Mignolla, E. (1985a). Neural dynamics of form
perception: Boundary completion, illusory figures and neon color
spreading. Psychological Review, 92, 173-211.
Summary
Grossberg, S. & Mignolla, E. (1985b). Neural dynamics of perceptual
This study has explored five parameters that effect the
grouping: Textures, boundaries and emergent segmentations. Per-
ception and Psychophysics, 38, 141-171.
ability of human observers to segregate a path from the Hayes, A. (1989) Representation by images restricted in resolution and
background. In line with several computational studies,
intensity range. PhD thesis, Department of Psychology, University
we explain our results in terms of an "association field"
of Western Australia, Australia.
which groups features according to a specific set of rules.
Hubel, D. H. & Weisel. T. N. (1974a). Sequence regularity and
These rules suggest specific constraints for grouping
geometry of orientation columns in the monkey striate cortex.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 158, 267-294.
structure with similar orientation content. Although
Hubel, D. H. & Weisel, T. N. (1974b). Uniformity of monkey striate
there are some interesting parallels between the grouping
cortex: A parallel relationship between field size, scatter and
of similar orientations and the lateral connections of
magnification factor. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 158,
cortical cells with similar tuning, further work is needed
295-306
to determine whether these parallels represent more than
Julesz, B. & Sumer, R. A. (1981). Early visual perception. Annual
Review of Psychology, 32, 575-627.
an interesting coincidence.
Keller, J. M., Crownover, R. M. & Chen, R. Y. (1987). Characteristics
of natural scenes related to the fractal dimension. JEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, PAMI-9,
REFERENCES
621-627.
Kellman, P. J. & Shipley, T. F. (1991). A theory of visual interpolation
Attneave, F. (1954). Some informational aspects of visual perception.
in object perception. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 141-221.
Psychological Review, 61, 183-193.
Knill, D. C., Field, D. & Kersten, D. (1989). Human discrimination
Beck, J. (1966). Effect of orientation and shape similarity on perceptual
of fractal images. Journal of the Optical Society of America A, 7,
grouping. Perception and Psychophysics, 1, 300-302.
1113-1123.
Beck, J. (1983). Textural segmentation, second-order statistics and
textural elements. Biological Cybernetics, 48, 125-130.
Koenderink, J. J. & Richards, W. (1988). Two-dimensional curvature
Journal of the Optical Society of America A, 5,
operators.
Beck, J., Rosenfeld, A. & Ivry, R. (1989). Line segregation. Spatial
1136-1141.
Vision, 4, 75-101.
Landy, M. S. & Bergen, J. R. (1991) Texture segregation and orien-
Bergen, J. R. (1991). Theories of visual texture perception. In Regan,
tation gradient. Vision Research, 31, 679-691
D. (Ed.), Vision and visual dysfunction (Vol. 10B). New York: Lowe, D. G. (1988). Organization of smooth image curves at multiple
Macmillan.
scales. Proceedings of the second international conference on com-
Blakemore, C. & Over, R. (1974). Curvature detectors in human
puter vision. (pp. 558-567). New York: IEEE.
vision? Perception, 3, 3-7.
Mandelbrot, B. B. (1982). The fractal geometry of nature. San Fran-
Bovik, A. C., Clark, M. & Geisler, E. S. (1990). Multi-channel texture
analysis using localized spatial filters. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 12, 55-73.
Canny, J. (1986). A computational approach to edge detection. JEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 12,
679-698.
Cutting, J. & Garvin, J. J. (1987). Fractal curves and complexity.
Perception and Psychophysics, 42, 365-370.
Eckhorn, R., Baur, R., Jordan, W., Brosch, M., Kruse, W., Munk, M.
& Reitboeck, H. J. (1988). Coherent oscillations: A mechanism of
feature linking in the visual cortex? Biological Cybernetics, 60,
121-130.
Engel, A. K., Konig, P. & Singer, W. (199l). Direct physiological
evidence for scene segmentation by temporal coding. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 88, 9136-9140.
Field, D. J. (1987). Relations between the statistics of natural images
and the response properties of cortical cells. Journal of the Optical
Society of America A, 4, 2379-2394.
Field, D. J. (1992). Scale-invariance and self-similar "wavelet" trans-
forms: An analysis of natural scenes and mammalian visual systems.
Marr, D. & Hildreth, E. (1980). Theory of edge detection. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London B, 207, 187-217.
McGuire, B. A., Gilbert, C. D., Rivlen, P. K. & Weise), T. N. (1991).
Targets of horizontal connections in macque Primary visual cortex.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 305, 370-392.
Morgan, M. J. & Hotopf, W. H. N. (1989). Perceived diagonals in grids
and lattices. Vision Research, 29, 1005-1015.
Nothdurft, H. C. (1985). Sensitivity for structure gradient in texture
discrimination tasks. Vision Research, 25, 1957-1968.
Nothdurft, H. C. (1991). Texture segmentation and pop-out from
orientation contrast. Vision Research, 31, 1073-1078.
Parent, P. & Zucker, S. (1989). Trace inference, curvature consistency
and curve detection. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 11, 823-839.
Pentland, A. P. (1984). Fractal-based description of natural scenes.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
PAMI-6, 661-675.
Rockland, K. & Lund, J. S. (1983). Intrinsic laminar lattice connec-
tions in primate visual cortex. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
In Farge, M., Hunt, J. & Vassilicos, J. C. (Eds), Wavelets, fractals
and Fourier transforms: New developments and new applications.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shas'ashua, A. & Ullman, S. (1988). Structural saliency: The detection
of globally salient structures using a locally connected network.

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
CONTOUR INTEGRATION BY THE HUMAN VISUAL SYSTEM
193
Proceedings of the second international conference on computer vision
(pp. 321-327).
Smor a dored line ip coise A Oott of good cogis, Thn ardepine
experimental results. Spatial Vision, 1, 163-177.
Sutter, A., Beck, J. & Graham, N. (1989). Contrast and spatial
variables in texture segregation: Testing a simple spatial-frequency
channels model. Perception and Psychophysics, 46, 312-332.
Ts'o, D. Y. & Gilbert, C. D. (1988). The organization of chromatic and
spatial interactions in the primate striate cortex. Journal of Neuro-
science, 8, 1712-1727.
Iman, S. (1990). Three-dimensional obiect recognition. Cold Sprir
arbor, Nmp.: Labo auory tarise ioloey (oli Ls Colo sprr
Uttal, W. (1975). An autocorrelation model of form detection. Hillsdale,
Wertheimer, M. (1938). Laws of organization in perceptual form
ondon: Harcourt (Brace & Jovanovich
Westheimer,G.
Bohters. Procedings a) ie Bayal Sociny af Londo B. 24l
215-219.
Wisor, tre disct Rinhard, Joumal af 9te) plichanicies of tmtica
А, 6, 106-115.
Zucker, S. W. (1986). Early processes for orientation selection and
grouping. In Pentland, A. P. (Ed.), From pixels to predicates: Recent
advances in computational and robotic vision (pp. 170-200). Nor-
wood, N. J.: Ablex.
ete, ion su Besbivo styles tor visual c(198u).iw.-Nterel Of ourv
tation, 1, 68-81.
Watt, R. J. (1984). Further evidence concerning the analysis of
curvature in human foveal vision. Vision Research, 24, 251-253.
Watt, R. J. & Andrews, D. P. (1982). Contour curvature analysis:
Hyperacuities in the discrimination of detailed shape. Vision Re-
search, 22, 449-460.
Acknowledgements—We thank Dr Curtis Baker for helpful comments
on an earlier draft of the manuscript. We gratefully acknowledge the
support of MRC Canada (MT 10818).
