
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Vision Res. Vol. 32, No. 11, pp. 2165-2175, 1992
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved
0042-6989/92 $5.00 + 0.00
Copyright © 1992 Pergamon Press Ltd
Color Discrimination and Adaptation
JOHN KRAUSKOPF,* KARL GEGENFURTNER*
Received 22 April 1991; in revised form 16 January 1992
We have measured color discrimination in the isoluminant plane under rigorously controlled adaptation
conditions. Iwo regimes were studied. Under the first regime the observer was adapted to the region
of color space in which the discriminations were made. Thresholds for detecting changes along the
S - (L + M) axis are a linearly increasing function of the excitation of the S cones. Thresholds for
detecting changes along the L-M axis are independent of the locus of adaptation along this axis.
The straightness of these functions is inconsistent with the theory that second stage mechanisms are
more sensitive in the middle of their operating ranges. No convincing evidence of interactions in the
effects of adaptation locus or test stimuli was observed. Under the second regime the observer was
adapted to one point in color space and the stimuli to be discriminated were located in other places
in color space. Discrimination seems to be limited primarily by mechanisms maximally sensitive to
modulation along the isoluminant cardinal axes but evidence suggestive of the operation of higher order
mechanisms was also found.
Color discrimination Adaptation Chromatic mechanisms
INTRODUCTION
A central problem in color vision is how color discrimi-
nation varies over color space. This problem has been
attacked theoretically and experimentally by Helmholtz
(1891), Schrödinger (1921), Stiles (1946) and Wright
(1941) among others. One of the most elegant exper-
iments on the problem was that of MacAdam (1942).
MacAdam designed a special color mixer which pro-
duced a bipartite disc consisting of a fixed half-field and
a variable half-field. Both halves were mixtures of lights
derived from the same source and passed through the
same two color-selective filters. The experimenter deter-
mined the relative amount of the two lights in the fixed
half and the observer repeatedly adjusted the relative
amount of the lights in the variable half. A large number
of color filter sets were selected and trimmed by ad-
ditional neutral filters so as to produce equally luminous
primaries at many different points in the C.I.E. diagram.
By using a number of carefully chosen sets of these
filters, fixed lights at the various points in the diagram
could be obtained with several pairs of filters, thus
allowing one-half of the field to be adjustable along
several different lines through those points.
The basic data were the standard deviations of the
matches made along the different lines. These were used
1o construct equal discriminability ellipses about a num-
ber of points in the C.I.E. diagram. The projection of the
MacAdam ellipses on the chromaticity diagram pro-
posed by MacLeod and Boynton (1979) is presented in
*Center for Neural Science and Psychology Department, New York
University, 6 Washington Place, 8th Floor, New York, NY 10003,
U.S.A.
Fig. 1. The variation of the orientation and the lengths
of the major and minor axes of these MacAdam ellipses
over the diagram is complex and is not compatible with
any simple theory of color discrimination. A further
problem is that different patterns of ellipses and large
variability of the ellipses have been reported when
repeated measurements were made for the same observer
(Wyszecki & Fielder, 1971).
The differences may be due to the way adaptation was
controlled in the experiments. MacAdam (1942) pre-
sented his 2-deg diameter bipartite field in the center of
a 42-deg uniform surround having a chromaticity that
approximated C.I.E. illuminant C and that was about
haif the luminance of the matching stimuli. Since the
observer was concentrating on the matching stimuli, his
central retina was presumably adapted to the matching
stimuli with some marginal contribution of the sur-
round. In other experiments (Wyszecki & Fielder, 1971)
the observers were encouraged to move their gaze over
the field including the neutral surround so as to control
adaptation.
The powerful effect the state of adaptation has on
discrimination was shown by Craik (1938). In his exper-
iments the target, modulated in luminance at 2 Hz
around a test luminance level, briefly replaced a steady
field whose luminance determined the adaptation level.
The threshold amplitude of the modulation was typically
a minimum when the adaptation and test luminances
were equal and increased markedly when the test lumi
nance was either greater or less than the adaptatios
luminance. It has been suggested that similar effects o
adaptation occur with chromatic stimuli (Brown, 1952
Pointer, 1974; Loomis & Berger, 1979).
2165

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
2166
0.2
0.0
0.4
1.0
FIGURE 1. MacAdam (1942) ellipses projected on the MacLeod-
Boynton (1979) chromaticity diagram. The primaries of the television
monitor used in the present work plot at the corners of the triangle
which defines the chromaticities obtainable isoluminantly if the lumi-
nance is not greater than that of the least luminant (blue) primary. The
area enclosed by the larger quadrilateral defines the chromaticities
obtainable when the luminance was equal to that of the red primary.
The area enclosed by the smaller quadrilateral defines the chromatic-
ities obtainable when the luminance was 50% of the maximum
possible.
These facts led us to believe that more orderly results,
possibly indicative of the operation of simple processes
underlying discrimination, might be obtained if adap-
tation were precisely controlled. In measuring the vari-
ation of color discrimination over color space we can
define two useful conditions with respect to adaptation.
In one condition, the observer is adapted throughout the
experiment to the same point in color space at which the
discriminations are made. In the second condition, the
observer is adapted to a fixed stimulus throughout the
experiment. The stimuli to be discriminated vary widely
in chromaticity and are briefly presented. Both con-
ditions are of both theoretical and practical interest. It
will be seen that results under each of these special
conditions are orderly and suggest the operation of
simple mechanisms.
JOHN KRAUSKOPF and KARL GEGENFURTNER
agree with cach other, and in the following data for KG
are presented.
Description of stimuli
We use the color space introduced by Krauskopf,
Williams and Heeley (1982) to describe our stimuli
(Fig. 2). At the origin is an equal-energy white. There are
two chromatic axes, L-M and S - (L + M), which
lie within the isoluminant plane and run through the
origin. The isoluminant plane of this space is essentially
the same as the chromaticity diagram proposed by
MacLeod and Boynton (1979), the L- M axis corre-
sponding to their r coordinate and the S- (L+M)
axis to their b coordinate. The spectral sensitivities of
the long (L)-, middle (M)- and short (S)-wavelength
sensitive cones on which this space is based are
those derived by Smith and Pokorny (1975). The
origin is the equal-energy point (in MacLeod--Boynton
coordinates, r = 0.667, b = 0.016). The range of stimuli
that could be produced at the luminance we used
(37 cd/m?) fell within the parallelogram depicted in
Fig. 1.
Our nomenclature, differing from that which has been
used previously (MacLeod & Boynton, 1979; Krauskopf
et al., 1982; Derrington, Krauskopf & Lennie, 1984),
directly expresses the theory implied by the use of the
space, namely that independent mechanisms exist some-
where in the visual system whose responses are deter-
mined in one case by the difference in the
signals
generated by the long-wavelength sensitive (L) and
middle-wavelength sensitive (M) cones, in a second case,
by the difference between the signals generated by the
short-wavelength sensitive (S) cones on the one hand and
the sum of the L and M cones on the other hand, and
ISOLUMINANT PLANE
METHODS
Equipment
The stimuli were displayed on a Tektronix 690SR
color television monitor driven by an Adage 3000 frame
buffer controller which generates images on the monitor
by reading through the picture memory in a raster scan
and interpreting the numbers in each location as a color
defined in a 256-element color lookup table. The inten-
sity of each of the three primaries was controlled by a
10-bit digital-to-analog converter. The display was gen-
erated at 120 Hz interlaced. Most of the stimuli in the
present experiments had a luminance of 37 cd/m?, the
exception being in the last experiment in which the
luminance was half that value.
Subjects
Data from four subjects were collected. One author
(KG) ran all of the conditions. Three other subjects ran
some of the experiments. The data for all the subjects
G
S- (L + M)
L-M
EQUAL EERCY
R
Y
FIGURE 2. Chromaticity diagram used to describe the stinuli. At its
origin is a neutral white. Two axes go through this white point. Along
the L - M axis excitation of the L and M cones varies so as to leave
their sum constant. Along the S - (L +M) axis only the excitation of
the S cones changes.

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
COLOR DISCRIMINATION
in a third the responses are determined by the sum of the
signals generated by the L and M cones.
Movement along the L - M axis is achieved by co-
varying the excitations of the L and M cones so as to
keep luminance and the excitation of the S cones con-
stant. Along the S - (L + M) axis only the S cone
excitation varies and the excitation of the L and M cones
is constant. This is the only condition under which both
luminance and the signal to the L - M mechanism are
constant. In another departure from previous usage
(Krauskopf et al., 1982; Derrington et al., 1984) we plot
G
increasing excitation of the S cones upward along the
S- (L+ M) axis in order to agree with MacLeod and
Boynton (1979). Along the luminance axis the exci-
tations of all three classes of cones vary in proportion to
their values at the white point. Stimuli along this axis
provide varying input only to the mechanism which
sums the L-and M-cone excitations and a constant input
to the two chromatic mechanisms.
It should be noted that the endpoints of the cardinal
axes do not correspond to "Unique Hues"
, as measured
by cancellation techniques (Hurvich & Jameson, 1955).
While variation along the L - M axis through the white
point produces stimuli that appear reddish or greenish,
variation along the S - (L + M) axis produces stimuli
that appear yellowish-green and purple, not unique
yellow and unique blue. Nevertheless, in order to avoid
circumlocation, we will occasionally use words like
"tred" and "green" to refer to stimuli along the L- M
axis and "blue" and "yellow" to refer to stimuli along
the S- (L+M) axis.
Procedure
The observer fixated the center of the television screen
which was about 10 deg square. For most of the time the
screen was uniformly illuminated with the current adap-
2167
ISOLUMINANT PLANE
DELTA
TEST
R
COMPARISON
ADAPTATION
POINT
FIGURE 4. Illustration of test and comparison vectors. The adap-
tation color is set to a fixed point in color space. The test vector is an
excursion from that point and defines the color of the three test lights.
The comparison vector is the sum of the test vector and a small
excursion delta.
10 deg
1.5 deg
T
T
ADAPTING COLOR
FIGURE 3. Spatial arrangement of the stimuli. The screen was
uniformly illuminated by the adapting light. On each trial four disks
appeared, Threc of them (T) had the same chromaticity, the other one
(C) differed slightly. The observers task was to report which one of the
disks was different.
tation color. On an experimental trial four discs 36 min
in diameter were presented as a Gaussian pulse of ‡3
o of 1 sec total duration. The centers of the discs were
located at the corners of a 54 min square centered on the
fixation point (Fig. 3). Three of the discs were of the
same color (test color). The fourth disc (comparison
color), randomly located at one of the corners on any
trial, differed slightly in color from the test discs. The
observer's task was to report which of the discs was
different from the others by pressing one of four buttons.
A staircase procedure was used to find those comparison
stimuli which were just discriminable from the test
stimuli. After three consecutive correct responses the
difference between the test and comparison stimuli was
decreased; after an incorrect response it was increased.
The mean of the reversal points of the staircases was
used as a threshold estimate.
A graphical representation of the stimuli used in the
experiments is given in Fig. 4. The axes of the graph are
the L - M and S - (L + M) axes with an equal-energy
white as the origin. The test vector represents the
maximum excursion of the test stimulus, the comparison
vector represents the maximum excursion of the com-
parison stimuli. The delta vector is the difference be-
tween the test and comparison vectors. In any threshold
measurement, the amplitude of this vector was adjusted
according to the staircase procedure, but its direction
was held constant and, therefore, both the direction and
the amplitude of the comparison vector might change.
Description of discrimination contours
We approximate the discrimination contours with
ellipses centered around the test color. In the following
we will denote the test color by xr with coordinates

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
2168
JOHN KRAUSKOPF and KARL GEGENFURTNER
[TL -M, Ts-(L+M)], the comparison color by xç =[CL-м, Scaling of axes
Cs-(L+m)], and the adapting color by xA=[AL-M,
As-(k+M)]. For a given comparison color xc the distance
from Xy is then given as
d(xxc)=(Xc-Xj)"G (Xc- xт),
(1)
where the 2 x 2 matrix G is chosen so that the right hand
side of equation (1) never becomes negative, is 0 if and
only if xT=Xc, and gives identical distances for
d(Xт, Xc) and d(Xc, Iq). A matrix that fulfills these three
conditions is called positive definite symmetric. Our goal
is to find a matrix G, so that all colors at threshold are
an equal distance from the test color. If ts is the
measured threshold along a given direction S, we define
xg=XT+Tsx d. To find the best fitting ellipse we then
minimize
There are no agreed-upon units for representing the
magnitude of stimuli along the L - M and S- (L + M)
axes. We decided to use as units the thresholds for
detecting changes from equal-energy white along each
cardinal direction. The results of these measurements for
one observer are shown in Fig. 5. In all subsequent plots
these threshold units will be used.
The b-axis of the MacLeod and Boynton (1979)
chromaticity diagram was scaled in an arbitrary fashion,
the scaling chosen so that the entire spectrum locus just
fit inside a square diagram. Therefore it is interesting to
note that, expressing the thresholds along these axes in
their units, Ar = 0.0011 and Ab = 0.0012 and further-
more the MacAdam ellipses are approximately circular
near the white point in Fig. 1. This is a coincidence. For
[(xg-Xy)"G(x=-X)-1]2
example, our Fig. 1 is not scaled equally along the two
(2)
axes. Furthermore, it is likely that the ratio of the
summed over all directions 8 in which we measure
thresholds along these two axes would depend on stimu-
thresholds.
lus parameters such as retinal location. There is a smalt
The matrix G completely defines an ellipse. There are
asymmetry in the data. Thresholds for detecting red
other ways ellipses can be parameterized, and some of
pulses are smaller than for green pulses. We have not
these parameters will be used in later descriptions. We
studied this factor in detail.
will call the longest extent of an ellipse its major axis and
denote it by a. The minor axis will be denoted by b. It
is in the direction orthogonal to the major axis. The
RESULTS
orientation of the major axis will be called 0. In addition
Two experimental regimes are of interest. In one case,
it is of special importance to us to know the semilength
the observer is always adapted to the point in color space
along the axes of our coordinate systems, we will call
at which the discrimination is made. In terms of the
them o_-m and Os-(L+M).
scheme in Fig. 4, this is the case in which the test
Fitting the data with ellipses is not guided by a amplitude is zero. The experimental task is simply to
particular theory, but was done because most theories
detect at which of the four locations a disc was presented
predict results that can be approximated by ellipses.
on a particular trial. In the second regime the adaptation
point is held constant and the direction and magnitude
of the test vector are varied.
0.018-
Discrimination at the adaptation point
0.017-
The variation in the thresholds for detecting changes
0 0.016 - E
eshol
0.015
S-(L+M)
-1
•
in the red or green directions are plotted as a fumction
•
of the location of the adaptation point along the L- M
axis in Fig. 6. The adaptation point varies more than 30
threshold units in the red or green directions from the
equal-energy white point without any measurable effect
on the thresholds.
0.014-
Similarly, the variation in the thresholds for detecting
-2
-2,0
1.0
changes in the yellowish and bluish directions are plotted
0.665
-1.0
0.0
L-M Thresholds
0.666
0.667
0.668
20
in Fig. 7 as a function of the location of the adaptation
0.669
point along the S - (L + M) axis. In this case, thresholds
are proportional to the excitation of the short..
FIGURE 5. Thresholds for detecting changes in different directions
wavelength sensitive (S) cones.
from an equal-energy white point. The L - M threshold unit was set
Thus, the effect of variation of the adaptation point on
at the average of thresholds for changes from the white point in both
the thresholds differ along the two cardinal axes. The
directions along the L - M axis and the S - (L + M) threshold unit by
question arises whether these effects are independent. To
averaging the thresholds for changes from the whitepoint in both
help answer this question we measured the thresholds in
directions along the S - (L + M) axis. The outer scales give the
MacLeod-Boynton values for the stimuli. Note that the scale size for
several directions about nine different adaptation points
hese units is slightly different on the two axes. The total range of
as shown in Fig. 8.
stimuli available was about 45 and 12 threshold units in either direction
The crosses mark the location of the adaptation
from the equal-energy white point along the L.- M and S-(L+M)
points. Stimuli that are just detectably different are
axes respectively.
indicated by the solid circles. For better readability the

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
2
COLOR DISCRIMINATION
KG
2169
THRESHOLD (L-M)
• RED
• GREEN
15
10
x
+
is
-5
-30
-20
-10
10
20
G
30
R
ADAPTING COLOR (L-M)
FIGURE 6. Thresholds for detecting reddish (upward pointing solid
triangles) or greenish (downward pointing solid triangles) pulses on
backgrounds varying along the L- M axis.
distance between the adaptation points and the
threshold stimuli has been multiplied by 3.
We fit the data with ellipses having major and minor
axes along either the L-M or S - (L + M) axes. We
assumed that the semiaxis along the L- M axis is
constant for all adaptation conditions while the semiaxis
along the S-(L+M) axis varies linearly with the
position of the
adaptation
stimulus
along the
S - (L + M) axis (which is equivalent to assuming that
the length of the semiaxis is proportional to the exci-
tation of the S cones).
This model with only three parameters appears to
fit the data quite well. The lengths of the best fit
semiaxes at the white point are 1.03 threshold units
along the S - (L+ M) axis and 1.24 threshold units
along the L - M axis. The length of the semiaxis along
the S- (L+M) axis is given by øs-(k+m)=1.03
+0.0357(Ts-(L + M) - As-(L+M)). The
root
mean-
squared-error of fitting equation (2) to the ellipses
was 0.14. When we removed the restrictions imposed
by the above model and fitted an unconstrained
ellipse to each data set (9 x 3 parameters) this error
decreased only slightly to 0.12. There is no systematic
variation of the orientation of the ellipses in that case.
KG
THRESHOLD (S-(L+M))
A YELLOW
• BLUE
-
-15
-10
10
15
B
ADAPTING COLOR (S-(L+M))
FIGURE 7. Thresholds for detecting yellowish (upward pointing
open triangles) or bluish (downward pointing open triangles) pulses on
backgrounds varying along the S - (L + M) axis. The stars indicats
lata points that had different values along the L - Mi axis.
10
20
30
L-M
FIGURE 8. Thresholds for detecting pulses on nine different back-
grounds. The ellipses are enlarged by a factor of 3.
Therefore there is no indication of interaction when
the adaptation point is moved in both directions
simultaneously.
Discrimination away from the adaptation point
The conditions used in the next set of experiments are
depicted in Fig. 9. In these experiments both the test and
comparison stimuli were excursions along the same
cardinal axis. The observer was adapted to an equal-
energy white throughout the experiment.
As shown in Fig. 10, discrimination thresholds in-
creased linearly with the amplitude of the test vector.
The results for stimuli varying along the L- M axis
appear more regular but it should be noted that the
scales of the two graphs are different. Test vectors of as
much as 40 threshold units could be used along the
L - M axis but of no more than 10 threshold units along
the S - (L + M) axis.
In order to increase the size of the test vector we took
measurements with the adaptation point set at about 20
threshold units from equal-energy white in the red
direction along the L - M axis (Fig. 11). The results of
this experiment agree with those in Fig. 6 in that the
thresholds for detecting pulses along the L - M axis are
independent of the absolute location of the test vector
along this axis. The thresholds depend only on the
difference between the test vector and the adaptation
point, and are lowest at the adaptation point, just as in
İuminance discrimination (Craik, 1938).
Krauskopf et al. (1982) showed that habituation along
one cardinal axis had no effect on thresholds for detect-
ing changes along another cardinal axis. We wished to
know if chromatic discrimination reveals similar inde-
pendent effects. The conditions for the next set of
experiments are depicted in Fig. 12. In these experiments
the test vectors were also excursions along one of the
cardinal axes while the difference vectors varied along
The results of these experiments are given in Fig. 13.
Thresholds for discrimination of excursions along one
cardinal axis are independent of the magnitude of test
vectors along the other cardinal axis. This is true for
difference vectors along the S - (L + M) axis even when

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
2170
the amplitude of the test vector is as much as 40
threshold units on the L - M axis.
This suggests that discriminations may be mediated
independently within mechanisms selectively responsive
along the cardinal axes. In order to examine this ques-
tion further we measured discrimination thresholds in 8
directions about test vectors in 16 directions around the
equal-energy white adaptation point. The results are
presented in Fig. 14. We fit ellipses independently to the
16 sets of data.
We have considered two theories which might account
for the data. One is that discrimination is performed by
mechanisms selectively responsive along cardinal axes.
The other assumes that there is a multiplicity of mechan-
isms tuned in different directions about the isoluminant
JOHN KRAUSKOPF and KARL GEGENFURTNER
(a)
"E• RED
- • GREEN
KG
THRESHOLD (L-M)
QO ~O
:
:
I
-40
G
-30
TEST VECTOR (L-M)
40
R
(a)
ISOLUMINANT PLANE
B
(b)
s YELLOW
-- BLUE
KG,
2
8
8
COMPARISON
TEST DELTA
R
ADAPTATION
POINT
-10
Y
10
TEST VECTOR (S-(L+M))
FIGURE 10. Thresholds for delecting deltas when deita und test lie
on the same cardinal direction. (a) Along L -M axis. (b) Along
S - (L + M) axis. The arrow indicates the adaptation point, which was
white.
(b)
ISOLUMINANT PLANE
B
plane and that discrimination thresholds in any direction
are elevated in proportion to the excitation, by the test
stimulus, of the mechanisms relevant to discrimination.
These theories lead to different predictions about the
variation of the orientation of the ellipses with the
azimuth of the test vector. On the first theory it is
expected that the orientation of the major axes of the
ellipses will be parallel to the cardinal axis nearer the test
COMPARISON
12
G
ADAPTATION
POINT
R
THRESHOLD (L-M)
10
A RED
T GREEN
KG
8
Y
-40
-30
-20
G
-10
10
20
30
TEST COLOR (L-M)
40
R
FIGURE 9. Conditions for test vector and delta vector along the same
cardinal direction. (a) Both along the L- M axis. (b) Both along the
FIGURE 11. Thresholds for detecting deltas along the L - M axis,
with test and delte on thesame axis and adaptation 1o a red
S- (L + M) axis.
background (indicaled by the arrow).

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
COLOR DISCRIMINATION
vector except for test vectors 45 deg removed from the
cardinal axes where the ellipses will degenerate into
circles. This theory also predicts that the ratio of the
major to minor axes of the ellipses should be maximal
for test vectors along the cardinal axes and should equal
1 for test vectors 45 deg away from the cardinal axes. On
the second theory it is expected that the major axes of
all the ellipses will point toward the origin. The data
don't support either theory. In the first and third
quadrants the ellipses tend to be parallel to the axes
except for the 45 and 225 deg directions where they are
approximately circular. However, the ellipses in the
other two quadrants tend to point toward the origin,
indicating that a multitude of mechanisms mediate the
discriminations.
(a)
ISOLUMINANT PLANE
B
THRESHOLD (L-M)
(a)
12
"E RED
• ã
- GREEN
2171
KG
COMPARISON
DELTA
TEST
G
(b)
R
G
ADAPTATION
POINT
Y
ISOLUMINANT PLANE
B
DELTA
TEST
COMPARISON
ADAPTATION
POINT
Y
-5
10
TEST VECTOR (S-(L+M))
(b)
• YELLOW
• BLUE
KG
2
1
4
4 X
L
-30
-40
-20
-10
10
G
TEST VECTOR (L-M)
20
30
40
R
FIGURE 13. Thresholds for detecting deltas when delta and test lie
on different cardinal directions. (a) Test on L-M and delta on
S - (L + M). (b) Test on S - (L + M) and delta on L - M.
DISCUSSION
The adaptation state of the eye has profound effects
on the size of color discrimination thresholds. When the
observer is adapted in the vicinity of the lights to be
discriminated the thresholds are constant for changes
along the L - M axis (Fig. 6). However, when the stimuli
to be discriminated are removed from the adaptation
point the thresholds increase by as much as 7 times
when the observer is adapted to a white background
10
R
LLLL
-10
-10
10
Y
FIGURE 12. Conditions for test vector and delta vector along
different cardinal directions. (a) Test on L-M and delta on
S - (L + M). (b) Test on S - (L + M) and delta on L- M.
L-M
FIGURE 14. Discrimination ellipses for test vectors equally spaced in
16 directions around the white point. The adaptation point was white.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
2172
JOHN KRAUSKOPF and KARL GEGENFURTNER
[Fig. 10(a), and even more when the adaptation point is comparison vectors along the S-(L+M) axis,
changed to a saturated red (Fig. 11).
equation (3) simplifies to
We have found it useful to consider two distinct
situations: (1) When thresholds for differences from the
d'=
AS
point at which the eye is adapted are measured, and (2)
d=
S
(4)
when the eye is adapted to a particular point in color
space and the thresholds for discriminating pairs of
colors at some distance from that point are measured.
The results obtained under these conditions are pro-
foundly different.
Color discrimination at the adaptation point.
Thresholds for changes in color from the adaptation
point follow a very simple pattern. Thresholds in the
S - (L + M) direction vary linearly with the excitation of
the short-wavelength sensitive cones. These test stimuli
produce a change only in the S-cone input. Thus, the
detection is a pure S-cone increment (or decrement)
threshold task. Thresholds are independent of the value
of the L- Mi component of the adaptation stimulus.
Theories of discrimination. The MacAdam (1942) el-
lipses are replotted in Fig. 1 as projections on the lower
right corner of the MacLeod-Boynton (MacLeod &
Boynton, 1979) chromaticity diagram. This plot demon-
strates that the thresholds for discriminating changes
parallel to the b-axis tend to increase with increasing
S-cone excitation. This feature of the MacAdam data
was pointed out by LeGrand (1949) and is very well
confirmed by our results in Figs 7 and 8. The data
plotted in these figures show a linear dependence of the
thresholds in the S - (L + M) directions as a function of
the locus of the adaptation point. LeGrand suggested
that discrimination thresholds tended to increase when
the excitations of the red or green cones were greater
than their values for white stimuli. Boynton and Kambe
We could also predict the results from the popular
idea that the effect of a constant stimulus is to reduce
the gain of the cone responses to changes in their
inputs. In this case, the detection mechanism would
compute the algebraic sum of the signals from the
different classes of cones prior to the decision process.
On this theory we might expect that the signal in the
S cones is given by AS/S and the assumption that the
cone signal has a constant value at threshold directly
predicts the results we obtain for signals varying along
the S- (L+ M) axis.
Yet another idea is that as the background intensity
increases the variance of the response within the cone
pathways to a steady field increases in proportion to the
intensity. On this theory we would predict, in the case of
tests and backgrounds varying along the S- (L + M)
axis, that the thresholds would vary as the square-root
of the excitation of the S cones. In fact, the variation is
linear but the uncertainty introduced by the quantal
fluctuations of the light must have significant effects on
the detectability of signals (Krauskopf & Reeves, 1980).
Let us turn to the effect of varying the adaptation
point along the L-M axis on thresholds for changes
along that axis. To derive the predictions from the
Helmholtz line element theory we rewrite equation (4)
leaving out the S term. At the same time we substitute,
following MacLeod and Boynton (1979), I= L/(L + M)
for L and m=M/(L+M) for M, noting that
L+M= constant:
(1980) and Nagy, Eskew and Boynton (1987) have also
concluded that this was true. Our results in Figs 6 and
d' =
A/
8 fail to show such an effect. We think this difference is
+
(5)
likely to be due to our more rigorous control of adap-
tation but further experiments are needed to test the
correctness of this view.
Let us consider some theories which might account for
Rearranging terms we get:
«_m'AР + PAm?
(6)
chromatic discrimination. For example, it might be
hypothesized that the signals within each class of cones
are independently detected. A line-element model of
Noting that m=1.0-/ and Al = - Am:
color discrimination like that proposed by Helmholtz
(1891) is an embodiment of such an hypothesis. In his
d_I(L.O-1)° + 1º14/
model, the difference between test and comparison color
(1.0-1)p
(7)
is given by
and
ГAM7
d'=
TAST
Al= -Am=d
/(1.0-1)212
+
S
(3)
LM.
V(1.0-1} +1°
(8)
where L, M, S are the absolute excitations of the The dotted curve in Fig. 15 plots the thresholds pre-
photoreceptors when the test color is presented, and AL,
dicted in equation (8).
AM, AS are the differences in photoreceptor excitations
between test and comparison colors.
If we postulate that the cone signals are scaled accord-
ing to their mean excitation, and thus that threshold for
First let us consider predictions concerning the effect
of the location of the adaptation stimulus on the
an isoluminant stimulus is achieved when:
S - (L + M) axis on detection of changes along that axis.
Because AL/L and AM/M are constant for test and
ГA/
T
ГAm7
(9)

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
COLOR DISCRIMINATION
2173
Following the same line that leads from equation (6) to results of a number of investigators [Boynton & Kambe,
equation (8), we obtain:
1980; MacAdam, 1942 (as analyzed by LeGrand, 1949);
1(1 - 1)
AI=-Am=CT+m
n=CT+1=1=c(1-B). (10)
The thick solid curve in Fig. 15 plots the thresholds
predicted in equation (10).
The results presented in Figs 6 and 8 were obtained at
a luminance of 37 cd/m'. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the
values of / achievable at this luminance ranged from 0.6
to 0.7 and the fact that the thresholds do not seem to
vary with locus along the L-M axis might not be
confirmed if adaptation were varied over a larger range
of 1. Therefore, we conducted an auxiliary experiment in
which discrimination was measured along the L-M
axis at a luminance half that previously used. As shown
in Fig. 1 this allowed measurements at values of / from
0.61 to 0.83. The results of these experiments are pre-
sented in Fig. 15. Once again there is no variation in
thresholds as a function of I. Both of the predictions
derived above [equations (8) and (10)] are inconsistent
with these results.
If the ability to detect signals were solely determined
by the statistical variability of the total number of
photons caught by the L and M cone pigments we would
expect the thresholds to be invariant with the location of
the adaptation point along the L - M axis. The variance
of the photon catch in the L cones would be pro-
portional to L and that in the M cones would be
proportional to M. Since L + M is constant for variation
along the L. - M axis, the total variance for an L - M
mechanism would be constant. This prediction is illus-
trated by the thin solid line in Fig. 15. This explanation
is not likely to be correct since it would also predict a
square-root law for intensity discrimination. Perhaps
some other process adjusts the sensitivity according to
the total L plus M excitation.
There are empirical grounds for expecting a different
trend to the data in Fig. 15. In particular, based on the
Polden & Mollon, 1980; Pugh & Larimer, 1980;
Stromeyer, Cole & Kronauer, 1985; Wandell & Pugh,
1980], it might be expected that thresholds would be
minimal in the middle of the range. It has been theorized
that second stage chromatic mechanisms should be
maximally sensitive when operating in the middle of
their operating range (Pugh & Mollon, 1979). However,
most of the evidence comes from experiments in which
the adapting luminances were much higher than used in
the present study and clear evidence for a marked
dependence of the effect on luminance was present.
That there may be important differences in the way
adaptation processes function at different luminance
levels is suggested by the measurements of the electrical
responses of single monkey cone receptors reported by
Schnapf, Nunn, Meister and Baylor (1990). They found
that cone sensitivities were little effected at low to
moderate luminance levels, being reduced by only a
factor of two at levels approximately equivalent to
100 cd/m?. The luminance levels used in the present
experiments were less than half this value. On the basis
of Schnapf et al!'s results we would not expect that cone
signals would be scaled according to their excitation
levels under our experimental conditions.
1.40
1.20 -
THRESHOLD
T
0.80 |
0.60
840-
0,20-
0,00 [
0.50
0.60
0.70
MacLeod-Boynton r
0,80
0.90
SE. The three curves indicate predictions from the three different
theories discussed in the text. The dotted curve is the prediction of a
Helmholtz type model [equation (8)], the thick solid curve for equation
(10) and the thin solid line is constant.
Color discrimination with the test vector variable
Our results agree with Craik's (1938) finding that
discrimination is best in the vicinity of the stimulus to
which the eye is adapted. In fact, our data conform to
this generalization better than do Craik's in that our
thresholds are always minimal at the adaptation point.
However, it remains to be seen whether this is a matter
of experimental technique or because of the difference
between chromatic and luminance discrimination. On
the other hand, that we find better defined minima than
Pointer (1974) and Loomis and Berger (1979) suggests
that experimental method is critical.
A striking feature of the present data is the absence of
any elevation in discrimination thresholds when the test
vector varies along one cardinal direction and the differ-
ence vector is orthogonal to that direction (Figs 12 and
13).
The results for test and difference vectors which vary
only along the cardinal axes are consistent with discrimi-
nation being mediated by mechanisms selectively respon-
sive along the cardinal axes. When the task is to detect
a reddish pulse, no stimulus is presented at three of the
possible loci, and thus the activity in those parts of the
field are samples of a circular noise distribution about
zero. When the test pulses are in the red direction along
the L- M axis and the difference vector is also in the
same direction, the four stimuli are nominally identical
pulses with the exception of the difference vector. If we
assume that detection is mediated only by mechanisms
along the cardinal directions, it might be hypothesized
that the standard deviation of the size of the internal
response to the test pulses increases linearly with their
amplitude. The assumed noise distribution is then

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
2174
JOHN KRAUSKOPF and KARL GEGENFURTNER
elongated along the red direction. Therefore the size of units. We obtained 32 threshold steps along the L-M
the increment of the test pulse would have to increase axis, and 14 threshold steps along the S- (L + M) axis.
linearly with the amplitude of the test pulse to maintain
Therefore, there are only 448 discriminable colors under
the same signal-to-noise ratio.
this condition. Because of the logarithmic relationship
This explanation fails when applied to the case in
that number is even further reduced if we change the
which the increments are orthogonal to the test pulses.
adaptation point from the central equal-energy-white to
In that case, we assume the same elongated noise
another color. For example, if we extrapolate our results
distribution. Thus the chances of the internal response of
to the case of adaptation to a greenish yellow at the
one of the test pulses being the most remote from the rest
corner of our chromaticity diagram we obtain only 180
of the responses would increase with test amplitude.
(20 x 9) discriminable colors.
Therefore, the magnitude of the increment in the orthog-
onal direction should increase, but this is contrary to
Practical considerations
fact. It seems that the information in the stimulus can be
Discrimination thresholds for the same color can
evaluated separately within mechanisms selectively re- change by a factor of 10 when the adaptational state of
sponsive along the cardinal directions.
This theory fails to predict the shape of the discrimi-
the eye is changed. This effect should certainly be
included in equations used to predict the perceived
nation ellipses for some cases for non-cardinal test
difference between two colors. When the adaptational
directions. If the discriminations were made solely with
state can be controlled, it should be chosen in a way such
mechanisms tuned along the cardinal axes, the major
that the observer is adapted to the discriminanda. Under
and minor axes would always be parallel to the cardinal
those conditions discriminability is best. The limitations
axes except for test directions of 45, 135, 225, and
of performance can be estimated from the results plotted
315 deg when the discrimination contour would be
in Fig. 8. In many situations, as for example when color
circular. Circles are a good fit to the data for tests of 45
and 225 deg, but ellipses with major axes pointing
is used for signaling, adaptation to the discriminanda
may not be possible. In this case one would use data like
toward the origin fit the data for 135 and 315 deg test
stimuli.
those in Fig. 14. Under those conditions the best dy-
namic range, with the largest number of discriminable
The red-green axis, or yellow-blue equilibrium line, of
colors, can be achieved by adapting the observer to a
the Hurvich and Jameson (1955) opponent color theory
is close to the L- M axis. However, the yellow-blue
color in the center (measured in threshold units) of all
colors presented.
axis, or red-green equilibrium line, does not correspond
to the S - (L + M) axis. Rather it falls close to the
negative diagonal of our coordinate system. This makes
it attractive to think that discriminations can also be
made by using mechanisms sensitive to the "redness"
and "greenness" of stimuli.
REFERENCES
Boynton, R. M. & Kambe, N. (1980). Chromatic difference steps of
moderate size measured along theoretically critical axes. Journal o/
Color Research and Applications, 5, 13- 23.
Brown, W. J. R. (1952). The effect of field size and chromatic
Number of discriminable colors
surroundings on color discrimination. Journal of the Optical Society
The data from these experiments can be used to
of America, 42, 837-844.
calculate the number of discriminable colors. Firstly,
Craik, K. J. W. (1938). The effect of adaptation on differentiul
brightness discrimination. Journal of Physiology, 92, 406 421.
since discrimination thresholds are smallest when the Derrington, A. M., Krauskopf, J. & Lennic, P. (1984). Chromatic
observer is adapted to the lights to be discriminated, the
mechanisms in lateral geniculate nucleus of macaque. Joural of
largest number of discriminable colors will be obtained
Physiology, 357, 241-265.
under this regime. Because there is no interaction be-
von Helmholtz, H. (1891). Versuch einer erweiterten Anwendung desi
tween the two cardinal directions under this regime, the
Fechnerschen Gesetzes im Farbensystem. Zeitschrijt für Psychologie
und Physiologie der Sinnesorgane, 2, 1-30.
number of discriminable colors is the product of the
Hurvich, L. M. & Jameson, D. (1955). Some quantitative aspects of
discriminable colors along the two axes. Neglecting the
an opponent colors theory: II. Brightness, saturation, and hue in
small increase in threshold along the S - (L+ M) axis,
normal and dichromatic vision. Journal of' the Optical Sociery u/
we can go 13 threshold units in either direction along this
America, 45, 602-616.
axis. Along the L - M axis thresholds are constant, and
Krauskopf, J. & Reeves, A. (1980). Measurement of the effect of
photon noise on detection. Vision Research. 20. 193-196.
we can go 53 threshold units in either direction. There-
Krauskopf, J., Williams, D. R. & Hecley, D. W. (1982). Cardinal
fore, there are approx. 2750 discriminable colors that we
directions of color space. Vision Research, 22, 1123-1131.
can produce on our monitor in the isoluminant plane at
LeGrand, Y. (1949). Le seuils différentiels de coleurs dans la théoric
a luminance of cd/m?.
de Young. Revue D'Optique Théoretique et Instrumentale, 28.
When the observer is adapted to a fixed light, discrimi-
261-278.
Loomis, J. M. & Berger, T. (1979). Effects of chromatic aclaptation on
nation thresholds rise linearly with the distance of the
discriminanda from the adaptation point in the relevant
color discrimination and color appearance. Vision Research, 19,
891-901.
cardinal direction (Fig. 10). If we, following Fechner,
MacAdam, D. L. (1942). Visual sensitivities to color differences in
sum just noticeable differences (jnds) along each direc-
daylight. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 32, 247-274.
tion, the number of jnds will be proportional to the
MacLeod, D. I. A. & Boynton, R. M. (1979). Chromaticity diagram
logarithm of the biggest possible excursion in threshold
showing cone excitation by stimuli of equal luminance. Journal of
the Optical Society of America, 69, 1183-1186.

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
COLOR DISCRIMINATION
2175
Nagy, A. L., Eskew, R. T. & Boynton, R. M. (1987). Analysis of Stiles, W. S. (1946). A modified Helmholz line-clement in brightness-
color-matching ellipses in a cone-excitation space. Journal of the
colour space. Proceedings of the Physical Society of London, 58,
Optical Society of America A, 4, 756-768.
Pointer, M. R. (1974). Color discrimination as a function of observer
adaptation. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 64, 750-759.
Stromeyer, C. F. III, Cole, G. R. & Kronauer, R. E. (1985). Second-
site adaptation in the red-green chromatic pathways. Vision Re-
Polden, P. G. & Mollon, J. D. (1980). Reversed effect of adapting
search, 25, 219-237.
stimuli on visual sensitivity. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B, 210, 235-272.
Wandeiyavdengi inctemendal fast9sby adticeintica ly codraion,
Pugh, E. N. Jr & Larimer, J. (1980). Test of the identity of the site of
way. Vision Research, 20, 625-636.
blue-yellow hue cancellation and the site of chromatic antagonism
Wright, W. D. (1941). The sensitivity of the eyeto small colour
in the w, pathway. Vision Research, 20, 779-788.
differences. Proceedings of the Physical Sociely of London, 53,
Pugh, E. N. Jr & Mollon, J. D. (1979). A theory of the T, and I, color
mechanisms of Stiles. Vision Research, 20, 293-312.
Schnapf, J. L., Nunn, B. J., Meister, M. & Baylor, D. A. (1990). Visual
Wybschil oi ih opliedt So ce 9 1m eca, ol, tiasilinz liposes.
transduction in cones of the monkey Macaca fascicularis. Journal
of Physiology, 427, 681-713.
Schrödinger, E. (1921). Grundlinien einer Theorie des Farbenmetrik
im Tagessehen. Annalen der Physik. 63, 397-521.
Smith, V. C. & Pokorny, J. (1975). Spectral sensitivity of the foveal
cone photopigments between 400 and 500 nm. Vision Research, 15,
Acknowledgements——We thank Robert Shapley for helpful criticism.
This work was supported by grants from the U.S. Air Force Office of
Scientific Research AFOSR-89-0429 and the National Eye Institute
VR 32/11~G
