
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Contrast masking in human vision
Gordon E. Legge
Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455
John M. Foley
Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106
(Received 12 February 1980)
Contrast masking was studied psychophysically. A two-alternative forced-choice procedure was
used to measure contrast thresholds for 2.0 cpd sine-wave gratings in the presence of masking sine-
wave gratings. Thresholds were measured for 11 masker contrasts spanning three log units, and
seven masker frequencies ranging I one octave from the signal frequency. Corresponding measure-
ments were made for gratings with horizontal widths of 0.75° (narrow fields) and 6.0° (wide fields). For
high contrast maskers at all frequencies, signal thresholds were related to masking contrast by
power functions with exponents near 0.6. For a range of low masking contrasts, signal thresholds
were reduced by the masker. For the wide fields, high contrast masking tuning functions peaked at
the signal frequency, were slightly asymmetric, and had approximately invariant half-maximum
frequencies that lie 3/4 octave below and 1 octave above the signal frequency. The corresponding low
contrast tuning functions exhibited peak threshold reduction at the signal frequency, with half-
minimum frequencies at roughly ‡ 0.25 octaves. For the narrow fields, the masking tuning functions
were much broader at both low and high masking contrasts. A masking model is presented that
encompasses contrast detection, discrimination, and masking phenomena. Central constructs of the
model include a linear spatial frequency filter, a nonlinear transducer, and a process of spatial
pooling that acts at low contrasts only.
INTRODUCTION
The term masking is used commonly to refer to any de-
structive interaction or interference among transient stimuli
that are closely coupled in space or time.! Adaptation is often
distinguished from masking, but the distinction is not very
precise. An adapting stimulus onset always precedes the test
stimulus and an adapting stimulus usually has a relatively long
duration. The effect of masking may be a decrease in
brightness, errors in recognition, or a failure to detect. This
paper is concerned only with the effect of one stimulus on the
detectability of another where the stimuli are coincident in
space and simultaneous in time.
The effect of one stimulus on the detectability of another
need not be to decrease detectability. Indeed, several studies
1458
J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
have shown that a low contrast masker increases the detect-
ability of a signal.2-4 This effect is variously called negative
masking, facilitation, or the pedestal effect. This paper is
concerned with this effect as well as the more common
masking effect.
In the experiments, an observer was required to discrimi-
nate the superposition a + b of two sine-wave grating stimuli
a and b from grating b presented alone. Grating b is termed
the masker. Its contrast remained fixed throughout a mea-
surement. Grating a is termed the signal. Its contrast was
varied to find its threshold. This masking procedure includes,
as special cases, contrast detection and contrast discrimina-
tion. In contrast detection, the masking contrast is O. In
contrast discrimination, masker and signal gratings have the
same frequency and phase, and differ only in contrast.
0030-3941/80/121458-14$00.50 © 1980 Optical Society of America
1458

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Contrast discrimination is sometimes referred to as contrast
increment detection. Our use of the term masking and our
paradigm for studying it are very similar to those commonly
used in the study of auditory frequency analysis.
Contrast masking has been used to study the spatial fre-
quency selectivity of pattern vision by measuring signal
thresholds at one spatial frequency in the presence of masking
patterns of other spatial frequencies.3,6-10 For high contrast
maskers, and signals at medium and high spatial frequencies,
these studies have found that signal threshold elevation is
maximal when the masker and signal have the same fre-
quency. Threshold elevation decreases regularly as the
masking frequency departs from the signal frequency. The
functions relating signal threshold elevation to masker fre-
quency may be termed spread of masking functions or
masking tuning functions.
It has been suggested that the bandwidths of these tuning
functions provide estimates for spatial frequency channel
bandwidths.? These estimates are in rough agreement with
tuning functions obtained in measurements of the spatial
frequency adaptation effect.11,12 However, there is consid-
erable variability in the form of tuning functions, both within
and between methods, even at similar spatial frequencies.
Widths at half-maximum range from 2 octaves10 in a masking
experiment, to 0.62 octaves13 in an adaptation experiment.
Estimates of the spatial frequency channel bandwidth from
measurements of the detectability of complex gratings con-
sisting of two sinusoidal components have yielded bandwidths
as narrow as 0.4 octaves14 or less than 1.0 cycle per degree
(cpd) in the range 5 to 20 cpd.15 However, it has been pointed
out that the channel bandwidths derived from the detection
of complex gratings depend very much on one's model of de-
tection.16-18 The same is true of masking and adaptation. It
is not possible to relate the frequency selectivity of the
masking or adaptation tuning functions to properties of
underlying spatial frequency channels without invoking
models of contrast masking or adaptation. To date, there
exists no model of contrast masking. Moreover, there is evi-
dence suggesting that adaptation may be determined in part
by the inhibition of one channel by another, 19,20 although the
need for this additional complication has been challenged.21
Consequently, at this point, the spatial frequency channel
bandwidth underlying frequency selectivity in masking or
adaptation is still undetermined.
In the present study, masked thresholds were measured for
a 2.0 cpd signal over a 2 octave range of masker frequencies
and a 3 log unit range of masker contrasts. If the masking
tuning function is to be taken as indicative of the relative
spatial frequency sensitivity of the detecting channel, then,
at a minimum, this function ought to have the same form in-
dependent of masker contrast. One objective of the study was
to determine whether contrast masking possesses this prop-
erty. It does not. However, the results may be interpreted
in the context of a model that includes a spatial frequency
channel whose sensitivity function is independent of contrast
and peaks at the signal frequency. This model is an extension
of the nonlinear transducer model of Foley and Legge for
contrast detection and discrimination.4
The second purpose of the study was to investigate prop-
erties of contrast masking under conditions of restricted field
• 1459
J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
size. It has been observed that masking tuning functions
become broader (on a log frequency scale) for low signal
frequencies.9,10 The broadening of the masking tuning
functions bears some similarity to peak shift and/or broad-
ening of spatial frequency adaptation tuning functions at low
spatial frequencies.12,22 Comparison of these studies suggests
a loose covariation between bandwidth estimates and field
size. This covariation raises the possibility that the broad-
ening of the tuning functions at low spatial frequencies may
be related, not so much to inherent properties of low spatial
frequency channels, but to the restricted number of cycles in
the stimulus. Hence, corresponding masking measurements
were made with stimuli that subtended either 6° or 0.75°
horizontally. This stimulus width variation was found to have
a large effect, but the model developed to account for the ef-
fects of varying contrast accounts for this result as well.
METHOD
Apparatus
Vertical sine-wave gratings were presented on a CRT dis-
play by Z-axis modulation.? The display, designed and
constructed at the Physiological Laboratory, Cambridge, had
a P31 phosphor. The constant mean luminance was 200
cd/m?. The raster was derived from a 100 Hz horizontal
sweep and 100 kHz vertical triangle wave.
The relation between grating contrast and Z-axis voltage
and frequency was measured with a narrow slit and UDT 80X
Opto-meter. As the grating pattern drifted behind the sta-
tionary slit, the Opto-meter obtained 256 luminance samples
per cycle. The resulting sequence of values was Fourier an-
alyzed.
By this means the harmonic composition of the
modulation was obtained for a given Z-axis voltage and fre-
quency. During the experiments, all contrasts were kept
within the range for which the amplitudes of harmonic dis-
tortion products were less than 3% of the fundamental. Lu-
minance modulation was horizontally restricted to a region
symmetric about the center of the screen. The remainder of
the screen was maintained at the constant mean luminance
level without modulation. This mode of presentation was
produced by passing the Z-axis signal through an electronic
switch. The onset and period of switch closure were con-
trolled by logic pulses from the CRT circuitry and corre-
sponded to that portion of the display sweep for which lumi-
nance modulation was desired.
Voltage waveforms, corresponding to masker and signal
gratings, were derived from two function generators. Their
outputs were electronically added and applied to the switch
prior to Z-axis input. As a result, CRT luminance modulation
consisted of the superposition of masker and signal gratings.
When the masker and signal had the same spatial frequency,
both were derived from the same function generator.
A DEC PDP-8 computer controlled stimulus durations, and
contrast levels with D/A converters, dB attenuators, and an-
alog multipliers.. The computer sequenced stimulus pre-
sentations and collected data.
Procedure
Observers viewed the display binocularly, with natural
pupils, at a distance of 114 cm. The screen subtended 10°
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1459

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
horizontally and 6° vertically, with a white cardboard sur-
round. For the wide field masking, modulation was restricted
horizontally to 6°, symmetric about a central fixation mark.
For narrow field masking, modulation was restricted hori-
zontally to 0.75°, symmetric about the same fixation mark.
When signals were presented, their onsets and offsets were
simultaneous with those of the masker.
Psychophysical threshold estimates were obtained with a
version of the two-alternative forced-choice staircase proce-
dure.24 The observer began by adjusting signal grating con-
trast to a value just above threshold by turning a hand-held
logarithmic attenuator. The observer was then given a block
of self-initiated trials. Each trial consisted of two 200 ms
exposures, marked by auditory tones, and separated by 750
ms. Only one exposure contained the signal grating, but both
exposures contained the masking grating. The observer
identified the signal interval by pressing one of two keys. A
correct choice was followed by a tone. Three correct choices
at one contrast level were followed by a constant decrement
in contrast, and one incorrect choice was followed by an in-
crement. The mean of the first six contrast peaks and valleys
in the resulting sequence was taken as an estimate of the 0.79
proportion correct contrast level.24 Typically, a block con-
sisted of about 35 trials. For each condition, the threshold
measure was the geometric mean of the threshold estimates
from four to six blocks. The error bars in Figs. 2 and 4 cor-
respond to t one standard error of the mean.
Contrast thresholds were obtained in two masking experi-
ments:
(1) Wide Field Masking: Signals and maskers subtended
6° by 6°. Contrast thresholds for sine-wave grating signals
at 2.0 cpd were measured as a function of masking contrast
for seven masking frequencies. The masking frequencies,
arranged to lie 0, approximately +¼, +½, and +1 octave from
the signal frequency were: 1.0, 1.4, 1.7, 2.0, 2.4, 2.8, and 4.0
cpd. For each masking frequency, the 11 masking contrasts
(percent contrasts) were: 0.05, 0.10, 0.20, 0.40,0.80, 1.6, 3.2,
6.4,12.8,25.6, and 51.2%.
An experimental run, lasting about an hour, was devoted
to a single masking frequency. Twelve signal threshold es-
timates were obtained, one in the absence of masking (de-
tection threshold), and one for each of the 11 masking con-
trasts. Masking contrasts were presented in either ascending
or descending order. No consistent differences could be ob-
served in the resulting threshold estimates, suggesting that
neither observer fatigue nor cumulative pattern adaptation
played a role.
Three observers participated in the experiments, although
time constraints prevented one observer from completing all
conditions. An observer's participation in a given condition
involved two runs through the set of contrasts, one in as-
cending and one in descending order. Except in Fig. 1, the
data points are always the geometric means of either four or
six threshold estimates, obtained from two or three observers.
For a given observer, the order of masking frequencies was
randomized across runs.
(2) Narrow Field Masking: Signals and maskers sub-
tended 0.75° horizontally by 6.0º vertically, symmetrically
arranged about the center of the screen. The remainder of
1460 J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
the screen was maintained at the same mean luminance level.
Signal gratings at 2.0 cpd were truncated to 1.5 periods, con-
sisting of a central bright half-cycle, flanked on either side by
dark half-cycles.
The same set of masking frequencies and contrasts was used
in the narrow field case, except that the lowest masking con-
trast of 0.05% was omitted. Procedural details were like those
for wide field masking. Runs of narrow and wide field
masking were interleaved.
Observers
There were three observers, all practiced with the methods
and stimuli. WWL is a female, and SH a male, both in their
mid twenties. JMF is a male in his late thirties. Throughout
the experiments, observers were optically corrected.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Individual data
At the signal frequency of 2.0 cpd, the three observers'
threshold contrasts (percent contrasts) for the 6.0º and 0.75°
gratings were, respectively: JMF, 0.28 and 0.51; WWL, 0.31
and 0.49; SH, 0.28 and 0.50. These values are geometric
means of 7 to 16 separate detection threshold estimates, col-
lected on different days in different runs.
Figure 1 shows data separately for the three observers when
the masker frequency was 2.8 cpd and the gratings were 0.75°
wide. Each point is the geometric mean of two threshold es-
timates. The important properties of the masking data will
be discussed in the next two subsections. Note here, however,
that the scatter of points across individuals is typical of data
collected in all masking conditions. No systematic individual
differences in sensitivity or shape of the masking curves were
apparent across conditions. Accordingly, data were combined
across observers. The remaining figures show combined
data.
10.0
3.0-
1.0
0.3
01-
0.03-
T
0.75° FIELD
O cod SIGNA
8 cpd MASKE
A
D WWL
• SH
O JMF
0.01
0.1
1
0.3
10
30
10.0 300
MASKING CONTRAST (%)
FIG. 1. Contrast masking data for three observers. Data for three ob
servers are shown separately for one masking frequency. Each point i
he geometric mean of two threshold estimates. The scatter of points i
ypical of results in other conditions. In subsequent figures, points represer
data averaged across observers.
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1460

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
6º Field
Masking
0- Frequenc
1.0
RELATIVE THRESHOLD ELEVATION
1.4
10
1.7
10
2.0
2.4-
10
$2.8,c
3฿
·4.0
0.05 0.15 0.5 1.5
5 15 50
MASKING CONTRAST (%)
FIG. 2. Signal threshold as a function of masking contrast: wide fields.
Signals and maskers subtended 6° by 6°. Contrast thresholds for 2.0 cpd
sine-wave gratings are plotted as a function of masker grating contrast for
seven masker spatial frequencies. To facilitate display, the sets of data
points have been vertically displaced and sequenced in order of masking
frequency. For each set of data, the ordinate gives threshold contrast in
arbitrary units re unmasked threshold level indicated by the horizontal
dashed lines. Data points are the geometric means of four to six threshold
estimates from three observers. Threshold estimates were obtained from
blocks of forced-choice trials. Error bars represent ‡ 1 standard error.
Straight lines have been fit to the data for masking contrasts in the range
3.2% to 51.2%. Their slopes are given in Table I. Smooth curves have
been drawn through the remaining data within a set.
Wide field masking
In the wide field masking experiment, sinusoidal luminance
modulation of the screen covered a horizontal extent of
6.0°.
Figure 2 presents signal thresholds as a function of the
contrast of maskers. The signals were always 2.0 cpd sine-
wave gratings. There were seven masking frequencies, one
for each of the sets of data in the figure. Both signals and
maskers were in cosine phase with the fixation point. Both
were presented simultaneously for 200 ms. The data points
are geometric means of four to six threshold estimates from
three observers (see METHOD). There were 11 masking
contrasts for each masking frequency, ranging over more than
3 log units from 0.05% to 51.2%. In Fig. 2, the ordinate is
relative threshold elevation. It should be interpreted as fol-
lows. For each set of data, the horizontal dashed line repre-
sents the unmasked detection threshold in arbitrary contrast
units. For a given set of data, all plotted thresholds should
be taken relative to this level. For example, the curve par-
ametrized by the masking frequency 1.0 cpd has an unmasked
signal threshold of 3.0 arbitrary contrast units. A datum
plotted at 9.0 represents a masked threshold greater by a
factor of 3 than the unmasked threshold.
There is a range of very low masking contrasts for which the
masker has little or no effect upon signal threshold. This
range is frequency dependent, being lower for maskers whose
frequencies approach more closely to the signal frequency of
2.0 cpd.
1461 J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
There is a range of high masking contrasts for which the
signal thresholds at all masking frequencies appear to lie along
straight lines in these double logarithmic coordinates.
Moreover, because the slopes of these lines are similar, they
appear to be roughly parallel. Best-fitting straight lines
(method of least squares) have been computed over the con-
trast range from 3.2% to 51.2%. They are drawn as the
straight line portions of the solid curves through the data in
Fig. 2. The slopes of these straight lines are given in Table
I. For wide field masking, the slopes range from 0.525 to 0.711
with a mean value of 0.620. There appear to be no systematic
variations of slope with frequency. To a good approximation,
the slopes at the seven masking frequencies may be taken as
equal, and the high contrast portions of the masking functions
in Fig. 2 as parallel. Parallel plots in double logarithmic
coordinates mean that the corresponding functions are scaled
versions of one another. The straight lines through the high
contrast portions of the masking functions in Fig. 2 are roughly
parallel, but they are not coincident. For masking frequencies
more and more remote from the signal frequency of 2.0 cpd,
corresponding straight lines are increasingly shifted to the
right, representing a decrease in the effectiveness of masking.
Denoting signal contrast threshold by Ct, masking contrast
by C, and taking the power function exponent to be 0.62, the
high contrast masking functions take the form
C =[k(f)C)0.62,
(1)
where k(f) is a frequency-dependent scaling factor. The
values of k(f) were computed using a least-square criterion
to find the best-fitting straight lines with slopes 0.62 through
the high contrast data in Fig. 2. Values of k(f) are presented
in Table I.
Values of k(f), normalized by the peak value at 2.0 cpd, are
plotted as the filled circles in Fig. 8(a) (see below). Best-fit-
ting straight lines have been drawn through the points to the
right and left of the peak for purposes of interpolation and
extrapolation later. k(f) may be termed a sensitivity func-
tion. It represents the sensitivity of signal detection at 2.0
cpd to maskers of different frequencies. The values plotted
in Fig. 8(a) are related reciprocally to masker contrasts re-
quired to produce a criterion signal threshold contrast. In this
respect, the sensitivity function of Fig. 8(a) is analogous to an
action spectrum. It corresponds to the "equivalent contrast
TABLE 1. Exponents of the power functions relating signal thresholds
to masking contrast.
Masking
Wide field
Narrow field
frequency
Exponenta
Exponentb
1.0
0.711
0.788
1.4
0.610
0.567
1.7
0.525
0.526
20
0.558
2.4
0.672
0.651
2.8
0.673
0.501
0.577
4.0
0.615
0.769
k(f)
0.0025
0.0059
0.0072
0.0152
0.0093
0.0089
0.0050
Mean
0.620
0.627
Based on slope of best-fitting straight line in log-log coordinates in the rang
.2%-51.2% masking contras
Based on slope of best-fitting straight line in log-log coordinates in the rang
.4%-51.2% masking contras
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1461

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
transformation" introduced by Blakemore and Nachmias.25
In the masking model to be presented below, this sensitivity
function represents the frequency selectivity of a linear,
spatial frequency filter (channel). Notice that the sensitivity
function is broader to the right of its peak than to the left.
The half-maximum frequencies lie near ¼ octave below the
peak and slightly more than ½ octave above the peak. The
overall bandwidth between half-maximum frequencies is
therefore about 0.75 octaves. Blakemore et al.26 found a
contrast-invariant channel bandwidth of 0.75 octaves from
grating adaptation studies using the equivalent contrast
transformation.
Pantle® used binocular viewing and forced-choice methods
to measure thresholds for sine-wave gratings presented for 1.7
s upon a continuously present, slowly drifting background
grating.
Frequencies of the background gratings varied from
those of tne signal gratings by factors of 1, 2, 3, and 5. Over
several conditions of masker and signal frequencies, and
contrast ranges, there was evidence for power-law relations
between signal threshold and background contrast. The
log-log slopes obtained by Pantle are not inconsistent with the
conclusion reached here, that masking functions in which
maskers differ from signals by as much as an octave in fre-
quency are scaled versions of the same power law, for a range
of high masking contrasts.
When the masker and signal both have spatial frequency
2.0 cpd, the observer's task is one of contrast discrimination.
Table I indicates that the best-fitting straight line through
the contrast discrimination data of Fig. 2 has a slope of 0.558,
well below the value of 1.0 predicted by Weber's law. Legge, 1°
using the same forced-choice procedure, luminance and
monocular viewing, has measured contrast discrimination
functions of this sort at several spatial frequencies. At 1.0,
4.0, and 16.0 cpd, the corresponding slopes were found to be
0.62, 0.67, and 0.70, respectively. (At the very low spatial
frequency of 0.25 cpd, the slope was only 0.28.) Several other
investigators have measured the contrast discrimination
function using a variety of stimulus conditions and procedures.
Some have found Weber's law behavior.27 Others find that
contrast discrimination thresholds increase more slowly than
Weber's law predicts.2,8,28-30 Still others find Weber's law
behavior under some conditions and departures from it under
others.31-33 For a discussion of possible reasons for these
discrepant findings, see Legge.1°
Now consider the nonmonotonicity of the masking func-
tions in Fig. 2. For masking contrasts between about 0.05%
and 0.8%, signal thresholds are lower than thresholds mea-
sured in the absence of masking. For instance, for a 2.0 cpd
masker having contrast 0.4%, the signal threshold is about
two-and-one-half times lower than the detection threshold.
In such cases, the masker may be said to facilitate signal de-
tection. This phenomenon has been termed the pedestal
effect. The pedestal effect also occurs for the discrimination
of luminance increments.34,35 It has been observed elsewhere
for grating contrast discrimination, 2,3,10,27,36 and has been
discussed at some length by Foley and Legge.* The pedestal
effect of Fig. 2 is frequency selective. It is readily apparent
when the masker and signal have the same frequency, but is
greatly diminished when the masker and signal differ by + 0.5
octaves. Unlike high contrast portions of the masking func-
tions of Fig. 2, the frequency-dependent shape of the pedestal
1462
J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
effect means that the low contrast portions of the masking
functions are not parallel. Hence, the low contrast portions
of the masking functions are not simply scaled versions of one
another.
The facilitation effect should be distinguished from "sub-
threshold summation.37" In the subthreshold summation
paradigm, the observer adjusts the contrast C1 of a superim-
posed pair of stimuli C1 + C2 until the combination reaches
threshold. In the forced-choice discrimination paradigm of
this paper, the masker C1 is presented in both intervals of a
trial, and the signal C2 is presented in one interval only. The
observer must discriminate between stimuli C1 and C1 + Cz.
The two procedures would not, in general, be expected to yield
the same result. In any case, a simple "summation to
threshold" model cannot account for the facilitation effect,
because signal thresholds are reduced by masking contrasts
well above the unmasked threshold, and because the sum of
masker contrast and threshold contrast is not constant when
the masker's contrast is below the detection threshold.
The frequency selectivity of masking can be examined more
carefully in Fig. 3. Data points, representing signal thresh-
olds, have been replotted from Fig. 2 as a function of masking
frequency. The masking contrasts parametrize these
masking tuning functions.
The ordinate is relative threshold
elevation, the ratio of masked to unmasked signal threshold.
The ten symbols represent masked thresholds obtained with
ten masking contrasts. Values for 0.8% masking contrast have
been omitted for the sake of clarity. An ordinate value of 1.0
means that there is no effect of masking. For very low con-
trast, there is no effect of masking. For masking contrasts in
the range from about 0.1% to 0.8%, there is a facilitation or
pedestal effect with very narrow frequency selectivity. As
the masking contrasts increase beyond 0.8%, the tuning
functions turn inside out and become the more familiar
threshold elevation functions. These have medium band-
20-
10-
6° Field
RELATIVE THRESHOLD ELEVATION
Masking
Contrast
51.2
25.6 0
12.8
6.4.
1.6
0.5
T
1.0 1.41.72.0242.8 4.0
SPATIAL FREQUENCY (cpd)
FIG. 3. Masking tuning functions for different masking contrasts: wide
fields. Signals and maskers subtended 6° by 6°. The data in Fig. 2 have
been replotted as relative threshold elevation of 2.0 cpd sine-wave grating
signals as a function of the spatial frequency of masking gratings. Smooth
curves have been drawn through the sets of data. The ten sets of data are
for different masking contrasts, as indicated. Data at 0.8% masking
contrast have been omitted for clarity. An ordinate value of 1.0 indicates
that masking has no effect.
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1462

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
0.75° Field
RELATIVE THRESHOLD ELEVATION
10~ Masking
Frequency
1.0
3--й=7
1.4
10
2.0
2.4
2.8
4.0
0.05 0.15 0.5 1.5
5
15
g-
MASKING CONTRAST (%)
FIG. 4. Signal threshold as a function of masking contrast: narrow fields.
The signals and maskers subtended 0.75° horizontally by 6° vertically. The
seven sets of data are analogous to those of Fig. 3, except that straight lines
were fit to the data in the range of 6.4% to 51.2% masking contrast.
widths and are more broadly tuned than the pedestal effect.
The high contrast tuning functions are asymmetric, being
slightly broader above their peaks than below. This asym-
metry in masking tuning functions has been noted else-
where.7,8,38,39
Some studies have found that masking contrasts that in-
crease signal threshold when they are close in frequency to the
signal act to reduce signal threshold when masking frequency
is about ½ the signal frequency.3,29,38 This phenomenon has
been called "remote facilitation." In our experiments, no
masker frequency is one-third the signal frequency. However,
facilitation is apparent at and near the signal frequency when
the masker has a contrast of 0.8% or less. These observations
suggest that facilitation is proximal at low contrasts, but be-
comes remote at high contrasts.
Can a single empirical measure be used to characterize the
bandwidth of spatial frequency masking? To the extent that
the high contrast portions of the masking functions in Fig. 2
are scaled versions of one another, estimates of the half-
maximum bandwidth frequencies in Fig. 3 will be invariant
over a range of high masking contrasts. The half-maximum
frequencies so obtained lie roughly one octave (or slightly less)
above the signal frequency, and about ¾ of an octave below
it.
However, such an empirical bandwidth estimate is certainly
inadequate for description of the frequency selectivity of the
pedestal effect. Its half-minimum frequencies lie roughly ‡¼
octave from the signal frequency. This very narrow tuning
of the pedestal effect in contrast masking has been noted
earlier 36
Certainly no single empirical measure can characterize the
frequency selectivity of masking over the full range of con-
trasts used in this study. Nevertheless, the masking model,
to be presented below, postulates the existence of a linear filter
whose (channel) bandwidth is invariant with contrast.
1463
J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
Narrow field masking
In the narrow field masking experiment, sinusoidal lumi-
nance modulation was confined to a horizontal extent of 0.75°.
The remainder of the screen was maintained at a mean lu-
minance level of 200 cd/m'.
Figure 4 presents 2.0 cpd signal thresholds as a function of
masker contrast, for seven masking frequencies. The con-
ventions for plotting the data are like those for Fig. 2. The
signals and maskers were always truncated sine-wave gratings
in cosine phase with a central fixation mark.
Once again, there is a range of high masking contrasts for
which the sets of data are well approximated by straight lines
in the double logarithmic coordinates. The lines are ap-
proximately parallel and have slopes well below 1.0. (See
Table I.) The mean slope is 0.627, very close to the value of
0.620 for wide field masking.
For a range of low masking contrasts, the pedestal effect is
evident at all masking frequencies.
In Fig. 5, data points from Fig. 4 are replotted as signal
thresholds versus masking frequency. The conventions for
plotting the data are like those in Fig. 3. The nine symbols
represent masked thresholds obtained with nine masking
contrasts. Values for 1.6% masking contrast have been
omitted for the sake of clarity. Smooth curves have been
drawn through the data at each masking frequency. For
masking contrasts below about 2 to 3%, there is a general fa-
cilitation effect that appears to extend across the range of
masking frequencies used. This broad tuning of the pedestal
effect is very different from the extremely narrow tuning of
the pedestal effect in wide field masking (see Fig. 3).
higher masking contrasts, the tuning functions turn inside out
so that the presence of masking elevates signal thresholds. At
high masking contrasts, these tuning functions become more
broadly tuned than those in Fig. 3 for wide field masking.
There appears to be a tendency for the peak threshold ele-
vation to occur for masking frequencies above the signal fre-
quency. Analogous effects have been observed under rather
20- 0.75° Field
RELATIVE THRESHOLD ELEVATION
10-
• 0.5-
Masking
Contrast
.51.2
-25.6
-0-12.8
T°6.4
10 1.41.72.02428 40
SPATIAL FREQUENCY (cpd)
FIG. 5. Masking tuning functions for different masking contrasts: narrow
fields. Signals and maskers subtended 0.75° horizontally by 6° vertically.
Other details as in Fig. 3. Data at 1.6% masking contrast have been
omitted for clarity.
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1463

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
different spatial frequency masking conditions. Legge° ob-
served that masking tuning functions for signals at 0.375 and
0.75 cpd were broader than those at higher signal frequencies,
and tended to have their peaks shifted to masking frequencies
above the signal frequency. The tuning functions were ob-
tained with gratings subtending 10°. Leggel° observed sim-
ilar effects for monocular masking tuning functions at 0.125
and 0.25 cpd, using a 13° field. Legge° hypothesized that
characteristics of masking tuning functions at low signal
frequencies might reflect properties of a transient mechanism,
having low-pass spatial frequency sensitivity, coexisting with
a set of band-pass sustained mechanisms. The results of the
present study, however, suggest that the broadening of
masking tuning functions may not be confined to low signal
frequencies below 1.0 cpd. Instead, it may be that broadening
is related to a reduced number of cycles in the stimulus grat-
ings. The number of cycles and the spatial frequency of sig-
nals covary for stimuli of fixed angular subtense. Further
research will be required to unravel the separate dependences
of the spread of masking upon signal frequency and field
Implicit in the data of Figs. 2 and 4 is an important differ-
ence between wide field and narrow field masking. In Fig. 6,
contrast discrimination thresholds (both signal and masker
at 2.0 cpd) have been replotted as a function of masker con-
trast for the wide field condition (•) and for the narrow field
condition (*). The two theoretical curves are discussed below.
For masking contrasts above about 6.4%, there is very little
difference between wide field and narrow field thresholds.
For low masking contrasts, below about 0.8%, wide field
thresholds fall well below narrow field thresholds. Similarly,
contrast detection thresholds (see Individual data) are lower
in the wide field condition than in the narrow field condition.
A notable peculiarity is that for a narrow range of intermediate
contrasts, the narrow field thresholds actually drop below the
wide field thresholds.
10.0
• NO SPATIAL POOLING
- SPATIAL POOLING
3.0-
* NARROW FIELD
• WIDE FIELD
1.0-
0.3-
0.1-
0.03-
Q01L
0.05 0.15
0.5
1,5
5,0
15.0
50.0
MASKING CONTRAST (%)
FIG. 6. Contrast discrimination: data and model. Contrast discrimination
thresholds, for which both signal and masker are 2.0 cpd sine-wave gratings,
have been replotted from Figs. 2 and 4 as a function of contrast. (•) wide
field; (*) narrow field. The two curves are derived from the masking model.
-prediction based on output of a single detector, no spatial poolin!
- -model predictions include spatial pooling over 6
1464
J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
The decrease in contrast detection threshold with an in-
crease in the number of grating cycles has been well docu-
mented.36,40-43 The new observation here is that a similar
improvement in sensitivity occurs for contrast discrimination
at very low contrasts as field size is increased, but that contrast
discrimination is relatively insensitive to field size at high
contrasts.
CONTRAST MASKING MODEL
There exists no quantitative model of spatial frequency
The model proposed here is an extension of the
nonlinear transducer model of contrast detection and dis-
crimination of Foley and Legge.4 The masking model is
comprehensive insofar as it treats processes of detection,
discrimination, and masking within a single theoretical
framework. The development owes much to the earlier work
of Nachmias and Sansbury,2 and Stromeyer and Klein.3 The
model bears similarities to detection and discrimination
models in audition (see, e.g., McGill and Goldberg' and Hall
and Sondhi.15) The model is presented in the spirit of a first
effort to account for a broad and complex body of masking
It accounts for most of the diverse results of this
paper.
The masking model postulates that detection of a 2.0 cpd
sine-wave grating signal is accomplished by an ensemble of
spatially localized detectors, differing only in their positions.
Each detector's response is determined by three processes—-a
linear filter characterized by a spatial frequency sensitivity
function k'(f), a nonlinear transducer F, and additive, zero-
mean, constant-variance Gaussian noise.
The model will be
fully characterized by specifying: (i) the function k'(f); (ii)
the functional F; and (iii) the "decision rules" by which de-
tector outputs are combined to determine a response in the
forced-choice procedure. Figure 7 is a schematic represen-
tation of the model. In the following subsections, k'(f) is
identified with the sensitivity function plotted in Fig. 8(a), and
the nonlinear transducer F is shown to have the form given
in Fig. 8(b). The model's decision rules incorporate a form
of spatial pooling at low contrasts, but not at high con-
Linear filter
Recent theoretical treatments have attributed phenomena
of spatial frequency selectivity in vision to hypothetical spatial
weighting functions or "receptive fields" associated with
spatially localized detectors,3,36,46-48 Legge36 has modeled
grating detection by an ensemble of such detectors, distrib-
uted across the visual field. The ensemble, all members of
which have the same spatial weighting function, was termed
a spatial frequency channel. The spatial frequency selec-
tivity associated with the channel is characterized by the
Fourier transform of the spatial weighting function. For a
detector centered at position xo in visual coordinates, having
spatial weighting function S(x), the output ro, associated with
stimulus waveform L(x), is
rO1L(x)/«SIx)S(x-xoldx.
(2)
This convolution is linear, and constitutes the linear fülter of
the masking model. For a sine-wave grating of frequency f
in cosine phase with the origin of coordinates, the stimulus
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1464

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
кіхл
MASKER
SIGNAL
LINEAR
FILTER
кіхЛ
'n
FlrX
FlrXS
Flç)y
NONLINE AR
TRANSDUCER
ADDITIVE
GAUSSIAN
NOISE
Elr,ly
DECISION
RULE
<DECISION)
V
"CHOICE 1
"CHOICE 2"
FIG. 7. Schematic representation of the masking model.
waveform L(x) is
L(x) = Lo(1 + Ccos2T/x),
(3)
where Lo is mean luminance and C' is the grating contrast. If
the detector is assumed to be insensitive to mean luminance,19
its dependence on the grating frequency f is found from Eqs.
(2) and (3) to be
rol)«CS=c032T/xS(x-xoldx.
(4)
Assuming that S(x) is center symmetric and of finite extent,50
we obtain
rolA «CCOsZT/xO S..
•C0927/xS(x)dx
(5)
= Ccos2tfxok'(f)
where the bracketed quantity has been rewritten as k'(f) and
is the Fourier transform of the symmetric function S(x).
Equation (5) indicates that the output of the linear filter, re-
sulting from a stimulus grating of frequency f, is proportional
to the product of three factors—grating contrast C, the value
of the sensitivity function k'(f) at f, and a phase-sensitive
factor cos2mfxo that depends on the position xo of the de-
tector.
The filter output for a detector located at the fixation point,
*o = 0, is simply Ck'(f). The contrast discrimination data in
Fig. 6 suggest that the effects of spatial pooling are largely
absent at high contrasts. Frequency selectivity of masking
1465 J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
at high contrast may, therefore, predominantly reflect the
filtering characteristics of detectors located at or very near the
fixation point. It has already been shown that, for a range of
high contrasts, the masking functions of Fig. 2 may be ap-
proximated by scaled versions of one another. This fre-
quency-dependent scaling is characterized in a contrast-in-
variant manner by the sensitivity function of Fig. 8(a). In the
context of the masking model, this spatial frequency sensi-
tivity function can be identified as the function k'(f) associ-
ated with the linear filter. The filter attenuates signal inputs
to the detectors in accordance with Eq. (5).
100
10 H
TRANSDUCER FUNCTION F
.01
(b)
50
.001.05
10|
0.15
0.5
15
5
CONTRAST (%)
15
SENSITIVITY
FUNCTION Kif)
0.3-
(a)
0.1
i4 172024 28 40
SPATIAL FREQUENCY (cpd)
FIG. 8. (a) Spatial frequency sensitivity function used in the masking
model. The scale factors k(A (Table I) obtained from high contrast masking
are plotted in normalized form as a function of frequency. Straight lines
have been fit through the points to the left and right of 2.0 cpd for purposes
of interpolation and extrapolation. (b) Nonlinear transducer used in the
masking model. Fis the nonlinear transducer of the masking model: Fr)
=(a//24////|2+ a.2) where a, = 45 and a, = 0.0075. Fis olotted for
the case in which r = C—detector located at Xo responding to a 2.0 cpd
sine-wave grating.
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1465

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
More generally, the spectral representations of stimuli of
finite width will be continuous functions of frequency. The
output of the linear filter for a detector centered at xo gener-
alizes from Eq. (5) to51
roaf.
C(f)k(f)cos2/xod),
(6)
where C(f) is the contrast spectrum of the stimulus. The
spectral spread of the stimulus becomes important when
modeling the narrow field results for which gratings were
truncated to widths of 0.75°. The fitted straight lines to the
points of Fig. 8(a) approximate k'(f). This approximation is
used in the numerical evaluation of the integral in Eq. (6).
It is known that contrast sensitivity decreases with in-
creasing retinal eccentricity,52-54 Effects of retinal inhomo-
geneity were probably slight in the current experiments. The
wide field gratings extended only 3° on either side of the
fixation point. Nevertheless, in the masking model, the filter
output of each detector was multiplied by the factor
exp(-0.116|xol). This function, taken from Wilson and
Giese,5* describes the decline in sensitivity with retinal ec-
centricity for 2.0 cpd gratings. Inclusion of this factor in the
masking model had only slight effects upon its perfor-
mance.
Nonlinear transducer
In the masking model, the output of the linear filter asso-
ciated with a detector is subjected to a nonlinear transfor-
mation, denoted F. If the output of the linear filter for a de-
tector at position xo is ro, the corresponding output of the
nonlinear transducer is F(ro).
Foley and Legge4 used contrast detection data to infer a
nonlinear transducer of the form
F =aC",
(7)
where a and n are constants, and C is the grating contrast.
They found values of the exponent n that ranged from 2.11
to 3.04, depending on observer and spatial frequency. A
positively accelerating nonlinear transducer of this type ac-
counts for contrast detection and discrimination data over a
range of low contrasts. With increasing contrast C, fixed
increments in transducer output are associated with ever
decreasing increments in transducer inputs. This property
of the nonlinear transducer can be used to model the facili-
tation that occurs with low contrast discrimination. However,
the nonlinear transducer of Eq. (7) Will not work at high
contrasts, because it predicts that threshold will continue to
decrease with increasing masking contrast. The choice of
nonlinear transducer to use in the masking model is55
F=a1|r|24/(|r|2+a22),
(8)
where r is the input to the nonlinear transducer, and a1 and
az are constants. This equation is plotted in Fig. 8(b) in
log-log coordinates, with values of the constants computed as
discussed below. For small inputs |r| < a2, the transducer
function reduces to F = (a1/a,2)|r|24, This form of the
transducer is compatible with the transducer inferred by Foley
and Legge,' Eq. (7). For large inputs |r| >a2, the transducer
has the form F = a1|r/04. At high contrasts, the transducer
is compressive, but nonsaturating. In the compressive region,
greater and greater input increments are required to achieve
1466
J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
equal output increments. In the case of contrast discrimi-
nation, the empirical consequence is that signal thresholds
increase with increasing contrast.
Notice that the constant az in Eq. (8) determines the ranges
of inputs r that lie in the positively accelerating and com-
pressive regions of the nonlinearity. If a2 were 0, there would
be no positively accelerated portion of the nonlinearity and,
consequently, no dip in the masking functions of Figs. 2 and
4. a1 is simply a constant of proportionality.
Noise process
Observers do not always give the same response in identical
forced-choice trials. To account for this fact, it is assumed
that noise is added to the output of the nonlinear transducer.
The noise is Gaussian, zero-mean, with constant, unit vari-
ance,57 and is uncorrelated with the noise in other detectors.
The inclusion of noise means that the output of a detector
must be regarded as a random variable. Let the output of a
detector, associated with a linear filter response r, be E(r):
E(r) = F(r) + e.
(9)
F is the nonlinear transducer; e is the additive, zero-mean,
unit-variance Gaussian noise; the mean of the random variable
E(r) is F(r), and its constant standard deviation is 1.0.
Decision process
An observer's response in a forced-choice trial depends on
a decision rule. The decision rule may apply to the output of
a single detector or may be based on the outputs of a set of
independent detectors. The way in which outputs from dif-
ferent detectors are combined to produce a decision will now
be discussed.
In a forced-choice trial, the observer is presented with one
interval containing the signal-plus-masker and another in-
terval containing the masker alone. Consider a detector
centered at xi. If its linear filter responses to signal and
masker are r's; and rm;, respectively, its outputs in the two in-
tervals of the trial are E(rsi + rm;) and E(rm;). For every de-
tector, it is assumed that each observation interval is associ-
ated with only one value of the output variable E. These
values are stochastically independent.
First, consider the case in which an observer's decision is
based upon the output of a single detector. Let the observer's
choice be governed by the following decision rule:
DECISION RULE: When the decision in a forced-
choice trial is based upon the output of a single detector,
choose the interval in which the value of the output
variable E is greater.
(10)
This rule implies that the observer computes the difference
E(rs + ™m) - E(rm) for the detector. If the signal-plus-
masker interval produces the larger output, his choice will be
correct. If the interval containing the masker alone produces
the larger value of E, his choice will be incorrect.
Now, consider the case of many detectors. Data of Fig. 6
suggest that field size is much more important to contrast
discrimination at low contrasts than at high contrasts. Ap-
parently, at low contrasts, observers can base decisions on
information collected over a wide portion of the visual field.
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1466

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
There have been several investigations of spatial pooling
models associated with contrast detection.16,17,36,58-62 The
most popular model has been termed probability summation.
Probability summation has been well developed for contrast
detection. However, it is not applicable, without considerable
refinement, to contrast discrimination or masking.
As an alternative model of spatial pooling that is applicable
to contrast detection, discrimination, and masking, the deci-
sion rule for one detector may be extended to many detectors,
as follows:
DECISION RULE: When the decision in a forced-
choice trial is based upon the outputs of many detectors,
identify the detector whose outputs in the two intervals
have the greatest difference. Choose the interval in
which this detector's output is greater.
(11)
This rule implies that the observer computes the difference
E(rsi t rmi) - E(rm,) for each detector, and then bases his
decision upon the detector for which this difference has the
largest magnitude.
Many decision rules are possible that include versions of
spatial pooling. Several decision rules, including linear and
quadratic summation across detector outputs, were studied
in attempts to model the masking data of this paper. None
were found to be as adequate as the decision rule given here,
although the differences were often small.
The contrast discrimination data of Fig. 6 suggest that the
effects of spatial pooling are primarily confined to low con-
trasts. 63 For purposes of modeling, the following decision
rules were adopted: (i) At low masking contrasts, the
forced-choice decision is based upon the output of many de-
tectors, according to the decision rule in Eq. (11); (ii) at high
contrasts, the forced-choice decision is based upon the output
of a single detector, located at the fixation point. The switch
in decision rules occurs at a contrast of about 1%.
In the case of spatial pooling, the following simplification
was made for purposes of calculation. Only detectors cen-
tered on peaks and valleys of the 2.0 cpd signal grating were
included in the decision process. 64
The properties of the masking model were studied with a
computer program simulation. For a given signal and masker,
a forced-choice trial was simulated by the following steps: (i)
A set of detectors was chosen by specifying their center posi-
tions x; in the visual field; (ii) the linear filter response of each
detector was calculated for the masker and signal-plus-masker
from Eq. (6), and weighted by the retinal inhomogeneity
factor; (iii) for each detector, the linear filter outputs were
subjected to the nonlinear transformation of Eq. (8); (iv) a
value drawn from a zero-mean, unit-variance Gaussian ran-
dom process was added to the output of each nonlinear
transformation, Eq. (9); (v) for each detector, the difference
in signal-plus-masker and masker outputs was computed, and
the forced-choice was determined by the decision rule given
in either (10) or (11). For a given masker and signal, 250 trials
were simulated, and the percent correct calculated. The
staircase procedure used in the experiments of this paper es-
timated the signal contrast that yielded 79% correct. Ac-
cordingly, the computer simulation repeated its computations
for signal contrasts until the corresponding values of percent
correct ranged from 60% to 90%. From these simulated
1467 J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
"frequency-of-seeing" curves, the 79% signal contrast was
obtained. Although the Gaussian noise component of the
simulation means that the model's predictions have some
variability, repetitions indicated that its threshold estimates
are good to better than 5%.
The masking model has now been fully specified, except for
evaluation of the constants a1 and a2 in Eq. (8). As noted
earlier, at high contrasts, the nonlinear transducer reduces to
a1|г10.4 and is independent of az. The value of a1 was chosen
by simulating contrast discrimination at 51.2% contrast. A
value of a1 = 45 was chosen because it yielded a threshold of
about 4.5% in agreement with observation. Similarly, a2
= 0.0075 was chosen so that the model's predictions for con-
trast detection thresholds for wide fields would approximate
closely the observed threshold of 0.3%.
The model may now be used to predict signal thresholds for
contrast detection, discrimination, and masking. The model
is characterized by a linear spatial frequency filter [Fig. 8(a)],
a nonlinear transducer (Fig. 8(b)], separate decision rules for
low and high contrast masking, and the constants a1 and
PREDICTIONS OF THE MASKING MODEL
Contrast discrimination
Two theoretical curves accompany the contrast discrimi-
nation data in Fig. 6. The solid curve, labeled NO SPATIAL
POOLING, was derived from the masking model by applying
the single detector decision rule, Eq. (10), across the full range
of contrasts. The broken line, labeled SPATIAL POOLING,
is the masking model's prediction based upon the decision
rule, Eq. (11), that incorporates spatial pooling over the 6°
field. A third theoretical curve, not shown, incorporates ef-
fects of spatial pooling in the narrow field case. It lies very
close to the NO SPATIAL POOLING curve at low contrasts,
and drops well below it at high contrasts. The two theoretical
curves in Fig. 6 indicate that the NO SPATIAL POOLING
predictions fit the narrow field data at all contrasts, and the
wide field data at high contrasts. On the other hand, spatial
pooling leads to predictions that provide a reasonably good
fit to the wide field data at low contrasts. Apparently, low
contrast discrimination at 2.0 cpd involves some form of
spatial pooling, but high contrast discrimination does not.
When the spatial pooling decision rule is used, the masking
model predicts contrast detection thresholds of 0.31% and
0.55% for wide and narrow field gratings, respectively, com-
pared with measured values (means across three observers)
of 0.29% and 0.50%. The predicted psychometric functions
for detection have the shape found experimentally by Foley
and Legge.'
Masking tuning functions at high contrast
Figure 9 presents the masking model's tuning functions
(solid curves) for masking contrasts of 51.2% and 25.6%.
Panel (a) presents wide field results and panel (b) narrow field
results. Data points are replotted from Figs. 3 and 5.
The model's predictions fit the wide field data quite well,
reflecting the broad and asymmetric form of the tuning
functions. The model's predictions for all masking contrasts
in the range 3.2% to 51.2% are similar in shape, and give
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley 1467

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
6.0°FIELD
RFLI
IVE
THRESHOLD
1.0
3.0-
AT
10.0
MASKING
CONTRAST (%)
51.2
-25.6
(a)
6.0° FIELD
MASKING
CONTRAST (%)
1.0
0.3
1.0
(b)
0.75° FIELD
(b)
0.75° FIELD
0 51.2
25.6
3.0-
1.0
1.0
14 17202428 40
SPATIAL FREQUENCY (cpd)
FIG. 9. Masking tuning functions at high contrast: data and model. Solic
curves are predictions of the masking model for 2.0 cpd signal threshold
levation plotted as a function of the spatial frequency of masking grating
f 51.2% and 25.6% contrast. (a) Wide field: 6° by 6°, data replotter
from Fig. 3. (b) Narrow field: 0.75° by 6°, data replotted from Fig. 5.
comparably good approximations to the data. It is interesting
to note that the channel sensitivity function, Fig. 8(a), is
considerably narrower than the spread of masking predicted
by the model. This difference can be traced to the form of the
nonlinearity that follows the stage of linear filtering.65
Clearly, the relation between the theoretical channel sensi-
tivity and the empirical frequency selectivity of masking de-
pends crucially on the model adopted to relate them.
The model's predicted tuning functions are broader for
narrow field masking than for wide field masking, in con-
formity with the data. The broadening can be traced to the
spectral broadening of grating stimuli that are truncated to
0.75°. The model gives a good account of the data at the
masking contrast of 51.2%, except for the rightmost point. A
possible source for the discrepancy between model and data
is the estimate of the channel sensitivity function, Fig. 8(a).
If the channel were to have a broad, high frequency tail, be-
yond 4.0 cpd, model predictions based on extrapolation of the
straight lines in Fig. 8(a) would lead to low threshold estimates
at high masking frequencies. Notice how peak masking shifts
to frequencies above the signal frequency for high contrast,
narrow field masking. The model predicts a slight peak shift
of this sort, arising because the spectrum of the truncated 2.4
cpd masking stimulus actually exhibits slightly greater overlap
with the channel sensitivity function than does the spectrum
of the truncated 2.0 cpd stimulus grating.
Masking tuning functions at low contrast
Figure 10 presents the masking model's tuning functions
(solid curves) for low masking contrasts. Panel (a) presents
wide field predictions for masking contrasts of 0.2% and 0.4%.
Panel (b) presents narrow field results for masking contrasts
of 0.2% and 0.4%. Data points have been replotted from Figs.
3 and 5.
For the wide field, the model prediets the very narrow
tuning of the facilitation effect. In part, the narrow tuning
is a reflection of a form of phase sensitivity inherent in the
1468 J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
0.3
14 17202428
40
SPATIAL FREQUENCY (cpd)
FIG. 10. Masking tuning functions at low contrast: data and model. Solid
curves are predictions of the masking model for 2.0 cpd signal threshold
reduction plotted as a function of the spatial frequency of masking gratings.
(a) Wide field: 6º by 6°, data replotted from Fig. 3. (b) Narrow field:
0.75° by 6°, data replotted from Fig. 5.
model. When signal and masker are both in cosine phase with
the fixation mark at the center of the display, but have dif-
ferent spatial frequencies, their relative phases will differ
everywhere except at points separated by distances equal to
the period of the beat frequency. Detectors that are optimally
stimulated by the signal grating are centered at the peaks and
troughs of the signal grating. These detectors will be stimu-
lated by maskers whose relative phase is often nonoptimal for
stimulating the detector. When the masker and the signal
have nearly the same spatial frequency, the masker acts to
lower signal threshold. In the context of the model, this fa-
cilitation is a consequence of the positively accelerated form
of the nonlinear transducer at low contrasts.
For narrow field masking at low contrasts, the model pre-
dicts very broad tuning of the facilitation effect.
The
broadening occurs because the phase selective narrowing due
to spatial pooling has been removed and because stimulus
spectra have been broadened. Note that both the data and
the model's predictions are so broadly tuned that frequency
sensitivity is hardly apparent. Comparison of the upper and
lower panels of Fig. 10 shows the very large influence that field
size has upon the frequency selectivity of the facilitation ef-
fect. For wide fields, upper panel, the frequency tuning is
extremely narrow. For narrow fields, lower panel, the tuning
is extremely broad. The masking model also possesses these
A rather strong assumption of the masking model is that
decisions concerning the presence or absence of the 2.0 cpd
signal always result from decision rules that are based on the
outputs of detectors that are optimally sensitive at 2.0 cpd.
This is an assumption of parsimony. Instead, it may be that
observers refer their decisions to different sets of detectors
for different masking conditions. Limitations of the masking
model in describing the data may result from a violation of this
Both the data and model exhibit different properties at low
and high contrast. In terms of the model, low contrast pro-
cessing is characterized by a linear filter, followed by an ac-
celerating nonlinear transducer, followed by spatial pooling
across detectors. Empirical consequences are that masking
facilitates signal detection, is narrowly tuned in frequency,
but sensitive to field size. High contrast processing is char-
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1468

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
acterized by the same linear filter, followed by a compressive
nonlinearity, and the relative absence of spatial pooling.
Empirically, high contrast masking elevates signal threshold,
exhibits medium to broad tuning, and is relatively insensitive
to field size. The striking differences between masking at low
and high contrasts may reflect the properties of separate,
underlying mechanisms. Accelerating and compressive
portions of the nonlinear transducer may be descriptive of
separate mechanisms. Foley and Legge4 have suggested that
the accelerating portion of the transducer may be the result
of a threshold process followed by the addition of Gaussian
noise. By comparison, the compressive portion of the non-
linear transducer may reflect the operation of signal com-
pression in the transmission of high amplitude signals along
visual pathways.
Why is spatial pooling less prominent at high contrasts?
One possible reason involves the properties of the Gaussian
noise that is added to the transducer output of each detector.
If, as assumed in the masking model, the additive noise is
uncorrelated across detectors, the decision rule in (11) results
in spatial pooling. If, however, the Gaussian noise were per-
fectly correlated across detectors, no spatial pooling would be
present. This account has some phenomenological plausi-
bility. Observers sometimes report that for very low con-
trasts, grating detection involves "seeing something" at dif-
ferent places in the stimulus field on different trials, as if local
response fluctuations were occurring. At high contrasts,
however, observers do not seem to report seeing patches of a
grating fluctuating in contrast. But why should the detector
noise become correlated at high contrast? Although we have
assumed constant-variance additive noise in the current
model, further study may indicate that the noise is signal
dependent, in which case some correlation might not be sur-
prising.
An important feature of the masking model is the ordering
of its elements. The linear filter precedes the nonlinear
transducer. Burton66 attributed visual "beats" to a frequency
filter that followed a nonlinearity. The possibility exists that
spatial frequency filtering occurs both before and after the
nonlinearity. However, there are two compelling reasons for
placing a stage of linear filtering before the nonlinearity.
First, it would be difficult to account for the fact that the high
contrast portions of the masking functions in Figs. 2 and 4 are
approximately parallel without assuming that the scaling
operation (linear filtering) occurs prior to the nonlinearity.
Second, evidence that pattern detection thresholds can be
predicted from a knowledge of pattern Fourier spectra67-69
requires that a stage of linear filtering precedes the nonlin-
earity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The masking experiments were performed in the laboratory
of Dr. F. W. Campbell, Cambridge University, while G. E. L.
held a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship from the Medical
Research Council of Canada, and J. M. F. held a grant from
the James McKeen Cattell Fund. We wish to thank Dr.
Campbell for his hospitality, encouragement, and for his many
instructive comments and suggestions. We thank A. H.
Harcourt, C. Hood, W. W. Legge, and D. Pelli for their help,
and N. Graham, S. Klein, and C. F. Stromeyer III for their
1469 J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
helpful comments on a draft of this paper. Some of the results
of this paper were reported at the annual meeting of the As-
sociation for Research in Vision and Ophthaimology, Sarasota,
1979. The research was supported in part by Public Health
Service Grant EY02857.
'R. Fox, "Visual masking," in Handbook of Sensory Physiology.
VIII. Perception, edited by R. Held, H. W. Leibowitz, and H.-L.
Teuber (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1978).
2J. Nachmias and R. V. Sansbury, "Grating contrast: discrimination
may be better than detection," Vision Res. 14, 1039-1042 (1974).
3C. F. Stromeyer, III and S. Klein, "Spatial frequency channels in
human vision as asymmetric (edge) mechanisms," Vision Res. 14,
1409-1420 (1974).
4J. M. Foley and G. E. Legge, "Contrast detection and near-threshold
discrimination in human vision," Vision Res. (in press).
"D. M. Green, An Introduction to Hearing (Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates, Hillsdale, New Jersey, 1976).
®U. Greis and R. Röhler, "Untersuchung der subjektiven Detailerk-
ennbarkeit mit Hilfe der Ortsfrequenzfilterung," Opt. Acta 17,
515-526 (1970).
c. F. Stromeyer, IIl and B. Julesz, "Spatial frequency masking i
ision: critical bands and spread of masking." J. Opt. Soc. Am. 6.
1221-1232 (1972).
8A. Pantle, Visual Information Processing of Complex Imagery
(Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory Report AMRL-TR-
74-43, 1974).
°G. E. Legge, "Sustained and transient mechanisms in human vision:
temporal and spatial properties," Vision Res. 18, 69-81 (1978).
1°G. E. Legge, "Spatial frequency masking in human vision: binocular
interactions," J. Opt. Soc. Am. 69, 838-847 (1979).
"A. Pantle and R. Sekuler,
"Size detecting mechanisms in human
vision," Science 162, 1146-1148 (1968).
12C. Blakemore and F. W. Campbell, "On the existence of neurones
in the human visual system selectively sensitive to the orientation
and size of retinal images," J. Physiol. (London) 203, 237-260
(1969).
13K. K. De Valois, "Spatial frequency adaptation can enhance contrast
sensitivity," Vision Res. 17, 1057-1065 (1977).
14M. B. Sachs, J. Nachmias, and J. G. Robson, "Spatial frequency
channels in human
vision," J. Opt. Soc. Am. 61, 1176-1186
(1971).
15R. F. Quick, Jr. and T. Reichert, "Spatial frequency selectivity in
contrast detection," Vision Res. 15, 637-643 (1975).
16C. F. Stromeyer, III and S. Klein, "Evidence against narrow-band
spatial frequency channels in human vision: the detectability of
frequency-modulated gratings," Vision Res. 15, 899-910 (1975).
17N. Graham, "Visual detection of aperiodic spatial stimuli by prob-
ability summation among narrow-band channels," Vision Res. 17,
637-652 (1977).
"Spatial sum
1m.F. On eftects on tvo-component gr ting Rhrshold," j.tipl,Soc.
Am. 68, 116-121 (1978).
D. J. Tolhurst, "Adaptation to square-wave gratings: inhibiti‹
tween spatial frequency channels in the human visual system
J. Physiol. (London) 226, 231-248 (1972).
20R. S. Dealy and D. J. Tolhurst, "Is spatial frequency adaptation an
aftereffect of prolonged inhibition?" J. Physiol. (London) 241,
261-270 (1974).
21C. F. Stromeyer, III, S. Klein, and C. E. Sternheim, "Is spatial ad-
aptation caused by prolonged inhibition?" Vision Res. 17, 603-606
(1977).
22D. J. Tolhurst, "Separate channels for the analysis of the shape and
the movement of a moving visual stimulus," J. Physiol. (London)
231, 385-402 (1973).
23F. W. Campbell and D. G. Green, "Optical and retinal factors af-
fecting visual resolution," J. Physiol. (London) 181, 576-593
(1965).
24G. B. Wetherill and H. Levitt, "Sequential estimation of points on
a psychometric function," Br. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 18, 1-10
25C. Blakemore and J. Nachmias, 'The orientation specificity of two
visual aftereffects," J. Physiol. (London) 213, 157-174 (1971).
26C. Blakemore, J. P. J. Muncey, and R. Ridley, "Stimulus specificity
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley
1469

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
in the human visual system," Vision Res. 13, 1915-1931 (1973).
27F. W. Campbell and J. J. Kulikowski, "Orientational selectivity of
the human visual system," J. Physiol. (London) 187, 437-445
(1966).
281. Bodis-Wollner, C. D. Hendley, and J. J. Kulikowski, "Electro-
physiological and psychophysical responses to modulation of
contrast of a grating pattern," Perception 1, 341-349 (1972).
29D. J. Tolhurst and L. P. Barfield, "Interactions between spatial
frequency channels," Vision Res. 18, 951-958 (1978).
3°G. E. Legge, "In search of Weber's law for contrast discrimination,"
Suppl. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 19, 43 (1980).
31I. Bodis-Wollner, C. D. Hendley, and M. Tajfel, "Contrast-modu-
lation thresholds as a function of spatial frequency," J. Opt. Soc.
Am. 63, 1297 (1973).
32J. J. Kulikowski, "Effective contrast constancy and linearity of
contrast sensation,'
" Vision Res. 16, 1419-1432 (1976).
33J. J. Kulikowski and A. Gorea, "Complete adaptation to pattern
stimuli: a necessarv and sufficient condition for Weber's law for
contrast," Vision Res. 18, 1223-1227 (1978).
34J. Nachmias and E. C. Kocher, "Visual detection and discrimination
of luminance increments," J. Opt. Soc. Am. 69, 382-389 (1970).
35T. E. Cohn, L. N. Thibos, and R. N. Kleinstein,
"Detectability of
a luminance increment," J. Opt. Soc. Am. 64, 1321-1327 (1974).
36G. E. Legge,
"Space domain properties of a spatial frequency
channel in human vision,
" Vision Res. 18, 959-969 (1978).
37J. J. Kulikowski and P. E. King-Smith, "Spatial arrangement of line,
edge, and grating detectors revealed by subthreshold summation"
Vision Res. 13, 1455-1478 (1973).
38J. Nachmias and A. Weber, "Discrimination of simple and complex
gratings," Vision Res. 15, 217-223 (1975).
39R. V. Sansbury, Some Properties of Spatial Channels Revealed by
Pulsed Simultaneous Masking, Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. of Psy-
chology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 1974 (unpub-
lished).
10J. Hoekstra, D. P. J. van der Goot, G. van den Brink, and F. A. Bil-
sen, "The influence of the number of cycles upon the visual contrast
threshold for spatial sine-wave patterns." Vision Res. 14. 365-368
(1974).
R. L. Savoy and J. J. McCann, "Visibility of low-spatial-frequency
sine-wave targets:
ependence on number of cycles, J. Opt. So
Am. 65, 343-350 (1975).
U. Estevez and C. R. Cavonius, "Low-frequency attenuation in th
tection of gratings: sorting out the artifacts." Vision Res. 1
497-500 (1976).
13J. J. McCann, R. L. Savoy, and J. A. Hall, Jr., "Visibility of low-
frequency sine-wave targets: dependence on number of cycles and
surround parameters," Vision Res. 18, 891-894 (1978).
1W.J. McGill and J. P. Goldberg, "A study of the near-miss involving
Weber's law and pure tone intensity discrimination," Percept.
Psychophys. 7, 105-109 (1968).
45J. H. Hall and M. M. Sondhi, "Detection threshold for a two-tone
complex," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 62, 636-640 (1977).
16J. P. Thomas,
"Model for function of receptive fields in human vi-
sion," Psychol. Rev. 77, 121-134 (1970).
*7I. D. G. Macleod and A. Rosenfeld, "The visibility of gratings:
spatial frequency channels or bar detecting units?" Vision Res. 14,
909-915 (1974).
48H. R. Wilson and J. R. Bergen, "A four mechanism model for
threshold spatial vision," Vision Res. 19, 19-32 (1979).
49The spatial frequency sensitivity function of Fig. 8(a) will be iden-
tified with the linear filter. Extrapolation of the fitted straight line
toward 0 cpd (uniform field) suggests little sensitivity to mean lu-
minance.
50In Eq. (4), letx'= x - xo. Then:
ro(l)=C SC0S2/(x' +x0)S(x') dx
=C S."(COS2m/x COS2T/xo - sin2/x'sin2r/xo)S(x)dx'
=CC0s2T/xo JC0327/x'S(x")dx
- Csin2T/xo Ssin27/x'S(l')dx.
Assuming S is even-symmetric and finite, the second term is 0, and
we are left with Eq. (5).
1470 J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
51The only restriction upon Eq. (6) is that the spatial sensitivity
function S(x) be center-symmetric and finite.
due to the position of the detector are accounted for by the factor
52R. Hilz and C. R. Cavonius, "Functional organization of the pe-
ripheral retina: sensitivity to periodic stimuli," Vision Res. 14,
1333-1337 (1974).
53J. J. Koenderink, M. A. Bouman, A. E. Bueno de Mesquita, and S.
Slappendell, "Perimetry of contrast detection thresholds of moving
spatial sinewave patterns. I. The near peripheral visual field,"
J. Opt. Soc. Am. 68, 845-849 (1978).
54H. R. Wilson and S. C. Giese, "Threshold visibility of frequency
gradient patterns," Vision Res. 17, 1177-1190 (1977).
55Fechner (see Boring,56 Chap. 14) derived a sensory magnitude
function from discrimination data. If the effects of spatial pooling
are ignored, Fechner's technique may be used to derive the trans-
ducer function F from the discrimination functions in Figs. 2 or 4.
The discrimination function is proportional to the reciprocal of the
derivative of F.
56E. G. Boring, A History of Experimental Psychology (Appleton-
Century-Crofts, New York, 1957).
57If the constant variance assumption is relaxed, the transducer
function cannot be inferred directly from forced-choice data.
In-
formation concerning the dependence of noise variance on contrast
could be obtained from other psychophysical procedures, such as
the "bootstrap" procedure of Nachmias and Kocher.34
With this
information in hand, a corrected form of the transducer function
could be computed.
Changes in variance with contrast would not
be expected to affect the shape of the channel sensitivity function,
Fig. 8(a). There exists little evidence concerning the dependence
of variance on stimulus contrast. Paired comparison data of Foley
and Legge' indicate small changes in variance over a range of low
contrasts. Further discussion of the effects of relaxing the constant
variance assumption is given by Nachmias and Sansbury.?
58N. Graham and B. E. Rogowitz, "Spatial pooling properties deduced
from the detectability of FM and quasi-AM gratings: a reanalysis,"
Vision Res. 16, 1021-1026 (1976).
59P. E. King-Smith and J. J. Kulikowski, "The detection of gratings
by independent activation of line detectors," J. Physiol. (London)
247, 237-271 (1975).
60H. Mostafavi and D. J. Sakrison, "Structure and properties of a
single channel in the human visual system," Vision Res. 16, 957-968
61H. R. Wilson, "Quantitative prediction of line spread function
measurements: implications for channel bandwidths," Vision Res.
18, 493-496 (1978).
62H. R. Wilson, "Quantitative characterization of two types of line-
spread function near the fovea," Vision Res. 18, 971-981 (1978).
63C. F. Stromeyer, III has pointed out an interesting property of the
contrast discrimination data of Fig. 6. If the narrow field data
points are moved downward by a factor of 2 and to the left by a
factor of 2, they are very nearly superimposed upon the wide field
This result means that contrast sensitivity for the narrow
field stimuli is a factor of 2 lower than contrast sensitivity for the
wide field stimuli.
64If the sampling density is doubled, center-symmetric detectors will
be included that are located at zero crossings of the signal.
these detectors will be insensitive to the signal, they will add only
noise, resulting in a small reduction in the improvement of sensi-
tivity due to spatial pooling.
The effect upon the masking model
is to elevate slightly its predictions for wide field masking at low
contrasts [Fig. 6, dashed curve, and Fig. 10(a)]. Refinement of the
masking model to include signal-dependent noise and/or odd-
symmetric receptive fields would reduce such sampling effects.
65If spatial pooling and spectral effects are ignored, a logarithmic
transducer results in Weber's law for discrimination, and masking
tuning functions that match the shape of the linear filter function.
If the nonlinearity is a power function with exponent n, the prop-
erties of masking will depend on the value of n. (i) For 0 <n <1,
there is threshold elevation and the masking tuning functions are
broader than the filter function. (ii) For n = 1, signal thresholds
are unaffected by the masker. (iii) For 1 <n <2, masking produces
facilitation, but the tuning functions are broader than the filter
function. (iv) For n > 2, masking produces facilitation and the
tuning functions are narrower than the filter function.
66G. J. Burton, "Evidence for nonlinear response processes in the
Gordon E. Legge and John M. Foley

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
human visual system from measurements of the thresholds of
spatial beat frequencies," Vision Res. 13, 1211-1225 (1973).
67F. W. Campbell and J. G. Robson, "Applications of Fourier analysis
to the visibility of gratings," J. Physiol. (London) 197, 551-566
68F. W. Campbell, R. H. S. Carpenter, and J. Z. Levinson, "Visibility
1471
J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 70, No. 12, December 1980
0030-3941/80/121471-06$00.50
© 1980 Optical Society of America
1471
